2016 S C M R 1420
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Anwar Zaheer Jamali, C.J., Sh. Azmat Saeed and Faisal Arab, JJ
Ms. SHAMUNA BADSHAH QAISARANI---Appellant
Versus
Khuwaja MUHAMMAD DAWOOD and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1628 of 2014, decided on 9th May, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 19-11-2014 passed by Election Tribunal, Bahawalpur and D.G. Khan Divisions in Election Petition No. 13 of 2013)
(a) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 76A---Non-disclosure/incorrect disclosure of properties belonging to returned candidate and her spouse---Election of returned candidate declared as void---Fact that certain properties were not disclosed in the nomination papers was not denied by the returned candidate in the present case---Plea by returned candidate that subject properties were not disclosed as they were transferred to her brother, did not find support from the revenue record---Only in an affidavit it had been disclosed that the properties had been transferred to her brothers---At the time of filing of the nomination papers these properties were admittedly in the name of the returned candidate and her spouse in the revenue record---Election Tribunal, in such circumstances, had rightly declared election of returned candidate as void and ordered fresh elections in the constituency.

 

(b) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 52 & 76A---Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 225---Election petition filed before the Election Tribunal along with an application under S.76A of Representation of the People Act, 1976---Corrupt and illegal practices alleged in the election petition not proved---Application under S. 76A could still be entertained and decided upon even where the petitioner failed in establishing allegations of corrupt and illegal practices made in the election petition---Such procedure was very much within the confines of Art. 225 of the Constitution, thus it could not be said to be unconstitutional.

 

Election petition alleging corrupt and illegal practices committed by returned candidate was filed before the Election Tribunal. During pendency of election petition an application was filed under section 76A of Representation of the People Act, 1976 alleging that the returned candidate had also failed to disclose certain properties belonging to her and her spouse. Before the Tribunal though the allegations of corrupt practices could not be established however while hearing the application filed under section 76A of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 it transpired that the returned candidate did in fact fail to disclose certain properties in her nomination form belonging to her and her spouse. Election of the returned candidate was declared void and fresh elections were ordered to be held in the constituency. Returned candidate contended that section 76A of Representation of the People Act, 1976 was contrary to the provisions of Article 225 of the Constitution; that according to Article 225 of the Constitution, no election to a House or Provincial Assembly could be called in question except by election petition and in the present election petition the petitioner failed in establishing plea of corrupt and illegal election practices and that, in the circumstances, the Election Tribunal ought not to have entertained the application filed under section 76A of Representation of the People Act, 1976.

 

Article 225 of the Constitution clearly provided that no election to a House or Provincial Assembly shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such tribunal and in such manner as may be determined by an Act of Parliament. The Representation of the People Act, 1976 was an Act of the Parliament, which had provided the manner in which an election was to be challenged before the Election Tribunal. Section 76A of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 granted suo motu powers to the Election Tribunal to declare election of a returned candidate void on certain grounds which included non-disclosure or incorrect disclosure of assets of the candidate or his spouse or his dependents. Under section 76A such disclosure could come from any source before the Election Tribunal, which in the present case came from the election petitioner. Procedure adopted by the election petitioner and entertained by the Election Tribunal in the present case was very much within the confines of Article 225 of the Constitution, thus it could not be said to be unconstitutional.

 

Khadim Nadeem Malik, Advocate Supreme Court and Arshad Ali Ch., Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

 

Sardar Muhammad Aslam, Advocate Supreme Court and M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent No.1.

 

Date of hearing: 9th May, 2016.
