2019 S C M R 382
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, C.J., Faisal Arab and Ijaz ul Ahsan, JJ
NASIR MEHMOOD and another---Appellants
Versus
UMAR SAJID and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 3 of 2017, decided on 13th December, 2018.
(Against judgment dated 27.10.2015 of Lahore High Court, Lahore, passed in Writ Petition No. 30944 of 2015)
(a) Punjab Local Governments Act (XVIII of 2013)---

----S. 27(2)(i)--- Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 63(1)(h)---Disqualifications for candidates---Conviction and sentence for a term not less than 'two years'---Multiple convictions carrying sentences of less than two years each---Candidate in question was convicted on four counts under different provisions of law and sentenced for a term of one year and six months imprisonment against each count---Sentences were ordered to run concurrently---Question was whether conviction on four counts and a sentence of one year and six months on each count was to be seen cumulatively or in the perspective of being served consecutively in the context of S. 27(2)(i) of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 (Act) read with Art. 63(1)(h) of the Constitution---Held, that benefit of running of the sentences concurrently was only to the extent of the period of incarceration in jail and the same would have no effect on the sentences awarded to a person on different counts which had to be read cumulatively for the purposes of disqualification envisaged by Art. 63(1)(h) of the Constitution and S. 27(2)(i) of the Act---For purposes of Art. 63(1)(h) of the Constitution and S. 27(2)(i) of the Act, the portion of sentence actually served was of no relevance and the disqualification was attracted on the basis of conviction and sentence awarded as opposed to served---Similarly when a person was convicted and sentenced for more than two years, but for a number of possible and perfectly legitimate reasons, he was released after serving a period of less than two years, the bar of Art. 63(1)(h) and S. 27(2)(i) of the Act would still be attracted, as the material consideration was conviction and sentencing and not the actual time for which the convict served his sentence. [Ch. Zahid Iqbal v. Returning Officer NA-162 (Sahiwal III) and 3 others 2013 CLC 1856 approved].

Ch. Zahid Iqbal v. Returning Officer NA-162 (Sahiwal III) and 3 others 2013 CLC 1856 approved and reaffirmed.

(b) Punjab Local Governments Act (XVIII of 2013)---

----S. 27(2)(i)--- Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 63(1)(h)---Disqualifications for candidates---Conviction and sentence for a term not less than 'two years'---Suspension of sentence---Effect on disqualification---Suspension of the sentence awarded to the candidate would have no consequence on his conviction which was complete as soon as the person charged had been found guilty by a Court of competent jurisdiction---Conviction of the candidate was relevant in the context of Art. 63(1)(h) of the Constitution and S. 27(2)(i) of the Punjab Local Governments Act, 2013 (Act)---Suspension of sentence would have no consequence on the conviction of the candidate the purposes of being qualified to contest either the local bodies elections or the elections for the Legislative Assemblies---Unless the conviction was specifically suspended by the Appellate Court by assigning cogent reasons therefor, or the appeal of the candidate was ultimately allowed and his conviction as well as sentence were set aside by the Appellate Court, the conviction of the candidate would continue to hold the field and the disqualification incurred by him, by reason of this conviction, shall remain intact.

M. Ahsan Bhoon, Advocate Supreme Court and Ch. Akhtar Ali, Advocate-on-Record for Appellants.

Azam Nazir Tarar, Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Rifaqat H. Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Respondents.