P L D 2015 Supreme Court 15
Present: Jawwad S. Khawaja, Mushir Alam and Dost Muhammad Khan, JJ
Mst. SHAHISTA BIBI and another---Appellants
Versus
SUPERINTENDENT, CENTRAL JAIL, MACH and 2 others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No.482 of 2014, decided on 19th September, 2014.
(On appeal from the judgment dated 30-9-2013 passed by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta in C.P.No.265 of 2012).
(a) Interpretation of statutes---
-----Punitive law curtailing liberty of person---While interpreting such

law, court was required to strive in search of an interpretation, which preferred the liberty of a person instead of curtailing the same and that too unreasonably and unfairly, unless, the statutory law clearly directed otherwise---If two equal interpretations were possible then the one favourable to the accused and his liberty must be adopted and preferred.

 

(b) Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)---

 

----Ss. 35 & 397---Conviction of several offences at one trial or different trials---Sentences of imprisonment---Hardship case---Discretion of court--- Concurrent running of sentences-Provisions of Ss. 35 & 397 Cr.P.C. widened the scope of discretion the court to direct that sentences of imprisonment or that of life imprisonment awarded at the same trial or at two different trials but successively, shall run con currently---Once the legislation had conferred the said discretion in the court, then in hardship cases, courts were required to seriously take into consideration the same to the benefit of the accused so as to minimize and liquidate hardship treatment---Court of law could not fold up its hands to deny the benefit of Ss.35 & 397, Cr.P.C. to an accused person as denial would amount to ruthless treatment.

 

(c) Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)---

 

----Ss. 35 & 397---Penal Code (XLV of 1860), S. 302-Explosive Substances Act (VI of 1908), Ss. 3 & 6--- Conviction of several offences at one trial---Death sentence---Commuted to life imprisonment by the Government---Quantum of period of imprisonment---Scope-- Hardship case---Discretion of court---Concurrent running of sentences---Appellant was sentenced to death and a total period of imprisonment was equal to 214 years---Subsequently death sentence awarded to appellant was commuted to life imprisonment by the Government---Held that, according to the calculation chart, the total period of imprisonment came to 214 years and the total amount of fine imposed was Rs.17,20000/- or in default thereof to undergo imprisonment for a further period of 11-1/2 years---After getting benefit of S. 382-B Cr.P.C. and various remissions, granted by the Federal and Provincial Governments and the jail authorities, the appellant had undergone sentence of 42 years, 7 months and 21 days---Court of law could not fold up its hands to deny the benefit of Ss. 35 & 397, Cr.P.C. to the appellant as denial would amount to ruthless treatment and he would certainly die while undergoing such long period of imprisonment---If concurrent running of sentences was denied to the appellant, it would bring at naught the benefit conferred upon him by the amnesty given by the Government and ultimately the object of the same would be squarely defeated as appellant would meet natural death during imprisonment---Construing the beneficial provisions in favour of the appellant would clearly meet the ends of justice---Supreme Court directed that all the sentences awarded to the appellant shall run and shall be deemed to have run concurrently; that the appellant shall also have the benefit of S. 382-B, Cr.P.0 and all the remissions whether granted by the Federal and Provincial Governments or the jail authorities, shall be extended to him---Appeal was allowed accordingly.

 

Khan Zaman v. The State 1987 SCMR 1382; Juma Khan v. The State 1986 SCMR 1573 and Altaf Hussain v. The State 1987 PCr.LJ 2169 ref.

 

(d) Administration of justice---

 

--Hardship case---Substantial justice by court---Technicality of law---For doing substantial justice in the true sense in a hardship case, technicality of law and rule shall not operate as an absolute bar in the way of the court because giving preference to the technicality of law would defeat substantial justice.

 

Malik Azmatullah Kasi, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellants.

 

Iqbal Khattak, A.P.G. for Respondents.

 

Date of hearing: 19th September, 2014.