2016 S C M R 998
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Mushir Alam and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
Ch. MUHAMMAD ASHRAF WARRAICH and another---Appellants
Versus
MUHAMMAD NASIR CHEEMA and others---Respondents
Civil Appeals Nos. 1169 and 1192 of 2014, decided on 11th May, 2015.
(Against judgment dated 5-8-2014 of Election Tribunal, Lahore, passed in Election Petition No. 226 of 2013)
(a) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 46---Election Tribunal, powers of---Scope---Appointment of a Commission to inspect the record of the certain polling stations---Election Tribunal enjoyed authority to carry out the exercise of examination of polled ballot either itself or through commission and may order inspection and or recount of the ballot papers---Such authority, however, was to be exercised with circumspection and care by application of mind on the strength of tangible and material evidence.

 

Returning Officer and the Election Commission rejected application of election petitioner for inspection of record. However Election Tribunal allowed application of election petitioner under section 46 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 and appointed a Commission to inspect the record of the 33 challenged polling stations. Returned candidate raised the objection that once applications for inspection of record had been rejected by the Returning Officer and the Election Commission respectively, the Election Tribunal should not have appointed a Commission to inspect and examine the counted ballot papers.

 

Election Tribunals were bestowed power to inspect and examine the ballot papers of all sorts i.e. polled, rejected, or spoiled etc. Such powers could not be invoked by any party to the election petition on mere ipse dixit nor, could be exercised by the Election Tribunal on its own whims and fancy and or mechanically. Party seeking such recourse or inspection and examination of counted ballot papers had to demonstrate and show to the satisfaction of the Election Tribunal that there had been improper, reception, refusal, or rejection of votes which had affected the outcome of the election materially. Election Tribunal, enjoyed elaborate and extensive authority to carry out the exercise of examination of polled ballots either itself or through commission and may order inspection and or recount of the ballot papers, however, same were to be exercised with circumspection and care by application of mind on the strength of tangible and material evidence, prima facie establishing that there had been wrong inclusion or exclusion of the ballot papers in the course of ballot count that had direct and material bearing on the final outcome of the result of the election. Objection of returned candidate with respect to appointment of Commission was dismissed accordingly.

 

Ehsanullah Reki v. Abdul Qadir Baloch 2010 SCMR 1271 ref.

 

(b) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 103AA---Power of the Election Commission to declare the poll in any constituency to be void---Such power included declaring and directing partial re-poll in some of the polling stations and not in the entire constituency.

 

Ghulam Ali v. Election Commission PLD 1991 Kar. 396; Salahuddin Tirmizi v. Election Commission of Pakistan 2008 YLR 1624; Wahid Bukhash Khan Bhayo v. Ghouse Bukhash Mahar 2012 CLC 39; Aftab Shaban Merani v. Muhammad Ibrahim PLD 2008 SC 779; Behram Khan v. Abdul Hameed Khan Achakzai PLD 1990 SC 352 and Manzoor Hussain v. Election Commission 2004 SCMR 672 ref.

 

(c) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 67(1) & 70(a)---Election Tribunal, powers of---Scope---In terms of S. 67(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 Election Tribunal had the power to order a partial re-poll in some of the polling stations rather than declaring election as a whole to be void and ordering re-poll in the entire constituency.

 

Election Tribunal had the power to grant all or any of the reliefs wholly or partly as set out in section 67(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 and to direct the Election Commission to take such ancillary and incidental steps as may be necessary to ensure honest, just and fair election in accordance with law and further to ensure that corrupt practices were guarded against.

 

Where the result of few challenged polling stations did not materially affect the overall result of the election then an order of invalidating the election either as a whole or in part would not be justified or warranted. However, where the ultimate result of the election was dependent on the outcome of the ballot count of even one or few polling stations, then order declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void in terms of section 67(1)(b) read with section 70(a) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 may be justified and ordering partial poll to the extent of such challenged polling station would only be necessitated, instead of declaring the election as a whole to be void.

 

Election Tribunal in consideration of ground realities and circumstances of each case may suitably mould the relief as may be appropriate, just, proper and fair.

 

(d) Administration of justice---

 

----Partial relief---Where a Court or Tribunal was conferred jurisdiction and power to grant large (whole) relief under the law, it also had jurisdiction to grant smaller (partial) relief.

 

(e) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 67(1) & 70---Election Tribunal, powers of---Scope---Partial re-poll---Non-performance of statutory duties by the Returning and Presiding Officers in 33 polling stations---Vote count of disputed 33 polling stations materially affecting the overall result of the election---Election Tribunal in such circumstances had the power to declare the election of returned candidate as void and order a partial re-poll only in the disputed 33 polling stations instead of declaring the election as whole to be void and ordering a re-poll in the entire constituency.

 

On election day election staff committed omissions and illegalities in respect of 33 polling stations of the subject constituency, and the vote count of the said polling stations had material bearing on the eventual outcome of the result of the election. In the present case, the difference between the returned candidate and runner up candidate was only 5,885 votes and between the returned candidate and the election petitioner only 7,421 votes. Total number of votes casted in favour of all the contesting candidates in disputed 33 polling stations as per consolidated statement in Form XVI was 34,229 votes, whereas only 19,500 polled votes were recovered from the bags of said 33 polling stations. There was staggering difference of 14,929 votes which was more than double the difference between the contestant parties. Thus it could be seen that the total votes cast in the disputed 33 polling stations would in fact determine the fate of contesting candidates in accordance with the will of the people. It was established on record that only the result of 33 polling stations was stained and soiled by non-performance of statutory duties by the Returning and Presiding Officers.

 

Election Tribunal was justified to declare the election of the returned candidate as void, for the simple reason, that if the vote count of disputed 33 polling stations was excluded, overall result would not be reflective of the true will of electors of the constituency.

 

(f) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 67(1) & 69---Election of returned candidate declared void---Not necessary that in such circumstances the election petitioner or another contesting candidate should automatically be declared as the returned candidate---Election Tribunal could declare the election petitioner or another contesting candidate as the winner instead of the returned candidate, only if it was prayed for and if the Tribunal was satisfied that the election petitioner or other contesting candidate was entitled to be declared elected.

 

Whenever the election of a returned candidate was declared wholly void, the election petitioner would not as a matter of right be declared elected. No doubt section 67(1)(c) read with section 69 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, did empower the Election Tribunal to declare the election petitioner or any of the contesting candidate to be declared as elected in event, the election of the returned candidate was annulled, and the election petitioner and or any of the respondents had so prayed; and secondly in cases where the Election Tribunal was satisfied that the election petitioner or such other contesting candidate was `entitled' to be declared elected. Thus it was clear that swapping of election petitioner and or any other contesting candidate was neither automatic nor a natural corollary to the invalidation of election of returned candidate, but was subject to two qualifying conditionalities as noted.

 

Questions as what constituted Election Tribunal being satisfied and when the election petitioner or other contesting candidate became entitled to be declared elected were neither elucidated nor any parameters were provided either under the Representation of the People Act, 1976 or Rules framed thereunder. However, satisfaction of the Election Tribunal to exercise power under section 67(1)(c) read with section 69 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, was to be based on rational criteria, guided by good conscience. One of the rational considerations may be where on the basis of recount of total votes and or on re-examination of valid and invalid vote count, the election petitioner and or any other contesting candidate had secured highest number of total valid votes as against the returned candidate; or in a situation, where votes of certain polling stations for any reason had not been correctly added up in the total vote count. In such like situation the outcome, was clear leaving no doubt and ambiguity in determining as to who had emerged successful. Election Tribunal could declare the election petitioner or any other contesting candidate, having secured highest number of vote as duly elected.

 

(g) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 67(1) & 69---Election of returned candidate declared void---Not necessary that in such circumstances the election petitioner or another contesting candidate should automatically be declared as the returned candidate---Election petitioner had to establish that he was entitled to be declared elected instead of the returned candidate---In the present case, difference of vote count between the returned candidate, the runner up candidate and the election petitioner was much less than the number of votes found to be missing from vote bags of disputed polling stations, thus it could not be determined as to which of the contesting candidate commanded the confidence of the majority of the electorate---Election petitioner could not be declared as 'elected' in such circumstances without a re-poll in the disputed polling stations.

 

Returned candidate, in the present case, was shown to have secured 7,421 votes more than the election petitioner, and his lead was even narrow i.e. merely 5,885 votes as against the runner-up candidate. Election of the returned candidate was not declared to be void as a whole in terms of section 67(1)(d) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 rather on account of discrepancy or missing valid votes count of actual votes casted in 33 challenged polling station, the Election Tribunal was persuaded to declare the election of the returned candidate as void within the contemplation of section 67(1)(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976. Total number of votes casted in all 33 challenged polling station, as per consolidated statement of votes count in Form XVI came to 34,229 votes, whereas, only 19,500 polled votes were recovered from the bags of all such polling stations. There was no explanation as to where the 14,929 votes disappeared. Since difference of votes count between the returned candidate, the runner up candidate and the election petitioner was much less than the missing number of votes, none of the parties to dispute could claim nor it could be determined as to which of the contesting candidate commanded the confidence of the majority of the electorate in the subject constituency. Election petitioner, was not able to make out any case whereby he could become entitled to be declared elected within the contemplation of section 69 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976.

 

Ch. Aamir Rehman, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellants (in C.A. 1169 of 2014).

 

Ch. Khurshid Anwar Bhindar, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellants (in C.A. 1192 of 2014).

 

Ch. Khurshid Anwar Bhindar, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent No.1 (in C.A. No. 1169 of 2014).

 

Ch. Aamir Rehman, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent No.1 (in C.A. No. 1192 of 2014).

 

Date of hearing: 11th May, 2015.