2016 S C M R 1448
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Sh. Azmat Saeed and Faisal Arab, JJ
COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS---Appellant
Versus
Messrs D.G. KHAN CEMENT CO. LTD.---Respondent
Civil Appeal No.1291 of 2005, decided on 27th April, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 1-1-2003 passed by the High Court of Sindh, Karachi in Special Customs Appeal No.142 of 2002)
(a) Customs Act (IV of 1969)---

 

----S. 19---S.R.O. 484(I)/92 dated 14-5-1992---Import of 'plant and machinery'---Exemption from customs duty and sales tax---Off-Highway dump trucks imported by cement manufacturing company---Whether such trucks fell within the definition of 'plant'---Use of Off-Highway dump trucks at the quarries made them part and parcel of the industrial process of the cement company in question and their utility formed an integral function in the manufacturing of the cement---Direct nexus existed between the use of Off-Highway dump truck at the quarry of the cement manufacturing factory with its industrial process---Such nexus brought the Off-Highway dump truck within the definition of 'plant'---Irrespective of the fact that Off-Highway dump trucks were mobile vehicles, they were utilized to further the industrial process without which the industrial process of a cement factory would get interrupted and hindered at the very initial stage---Off-Highway dump trucks fell within the definition of the present company's cement plant.

 

Under S.R.O. 484(I)/92 dated 14-5-1992, plant and machinery, not manufactured locally, which were imported for setting up a new unit or for expansion or balancing, modernization and replacement of an already existing unit in certain areas was granted exemption from the whole of the customs duty and sales tax subject to fulfilling certain conditions. Cement company, in the present case, imported three Off-Highway dump trucks and claimed exemption from customs duty and sales tax under S.R.O. 484(I)/92 dated 14.05.1992 by contending that the Off-Highway dump trucks were imported for use in the industrial process of a cement factory, therefore, the same should be regarded as part of the plant and machinery of the cement factory.

 

Entire set of machines used in conjunction with other apparatus and electrical and mechanical equipment, required for undertaking and completing the cement industrial process, starting right from quarrying till the finished product that was produced was to be regarded as part of the plant of the cement company. In cement industry Off-Highway trucks were used at the quarries where the predominant raw-material in the cement production 'limestone' was won from the quarry by either extraction or blasting following which it was hauled on Off-Highway dump trucks to the place where the second stage in the cement manufacturing i.e. crushing of the raw-material took place. Thus there was direct nexus between the use of Off-Highway dump truck at the quarry of a cement manufacturing factory with its industrial process. Such nexus brought the Off-Highway dump truck within the definition of 'plant'. Off-Highway dump trucks could not be excluded from being treated as part of the plant of a cement factory, where their utility formed an integral function in the manufacturing of the cement. Irrespective of the fact that Off-Highway dump trucks were mobile vehicles, these trucks were utilized to further the industrial process without which the industrial process of a cement factory would get interrupted and hindered at the very initial stage.

 

Yarmouth v. France 1887 LIR 19 Q.B.D. 647 ref.

 

In the present case, the quarrying of materials was undertaken by one and the same enterprise which after completion of the remaining stages involved in the manufacturing of cement (crushing, blending, heating, cooling, clinkering and milling) ended with the portable cement being produced in bulk or bags for consumption. Cement company, in the present case seemed to be so designed that its' Off-Highway dump trucks involved in the industrial process were to be regarded as part of the 'plant' of the cement factory. Use of Off-Highway dump trucks at the quarries made them part and parcel of the industrial process of a cement factory and thus such trucks fell within the definition of the company's cement plant.

 

(b) Customs Act (IV of 1969)---

 

----Ss. 19 & 30---S.R.O. 484(I)/92 dated 14-5-1992---S.R.O. 978(I)/95 dated 4-12-1995---Import of 'plant and machinery'---Exemption from customs duty and sales tax---Cut off date for SRO---Letter of credit for imported consignment opened within cut-off date mentioned in SRO, whereas consignment delivered at port after the cut-off date---Date on which 'Letter of Credit' was established or steps were taken in respect of import of consignment were not relevant and it was the date of import which determined applicability of the customs duty---In such circumstances importer-company was not entitled to seek exemption granted under S.R.O. 484(I)/92 dated 14-5-1992---However, the company was entitled to exemption to a limited extent by virtue of a different S.R.O. No. 978(I)/95 dated 4-12-1995 which exempted duties and charges over and above 25% of the leviable customs duty and sales tax and no more---Customs authority was justified in recovering customs dues and sales tax on the imported consignment accordingly.

 

Fauji Cement Company Limited v. Federation of Pakistan 2014 SCMR 994 ref.

 

Raja Muhammad Iqbal, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Salman Akram Raja, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent.

 

Dates of hearing: 13th and 27th April, 2016.