2017 P L C (C.S.) 397
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Gulzar Ahmed, Umar Ata Bandial and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
ZARAI TARAQIATI BANK LTD.
Versus
MUHAMMAD ASIM RAFIQUE and others
Civil Appeals Nos. 1255 and 1256 of 2012, decided on 30th June, 2016.
(Against judgment dated 11-9-2012 of the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench passed in ICAs Nos.104 and 105 of 2011)
Civil service---

----Zarai Taraqiati Bank---Regularization in service---Advertisement for post of Management Trainee Officer of Bank---Successful candidates offered contract job as 'trainees' instead of advertised 'regular posts'---Legality---Bank had no mandate to conduct training for any individual other than its employees---Entire process commencing with the advertisement in newspaper and ending with the final selection and posting of the respondents, was a process of appointment to the post of officer and out of a large number of successful candidates, only 30 were inducted, as there were only such number of vacancies, however, the Bank instead of issuing appointment letters to the respondents made them sign contracts, which were clearly in conflict with the bank's promise of job to the eligible and selected candidates---Respondents were posted at various places in the Bank as 'trainees' but were, entrusted duties and functions as were discharged and performed by officers of the Bank---Not confirming/regularizing services of respondents would be unfair---Fresh recruitment by the Bank in place of the respondents was also against the interest of the Bank as the same would be an expensive exercise in terms of time, money and effort---Respondents since their induction had been performing their job satisfactorily, and were acclimatized with the working of the Bank---Signing of contracts by respondents, could not be allowed to be used as an obstructive instrument in their way of confirmation/regularization, especially because of the non-equilibrium between the bargaining position of the respondents and the Bank---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Bank placed advertisement in a newspaper for the post of Management Trainee Officer. Respondents applied, passed the written test and were selected after their interviews, however, instead of issuing appointment letters, the Bank offered them a contract for on the job training as Management Trainee, for a period of two years. Instead of the word 'salary' word 'stipend' was used for their payment. Contract further provided that the same would not constitute employee/employer relationship between the trainee and the Bank; that training could be extended beyond the original period of two years, and that the training did not offer any guarantee of regular employment in the Bank. Upon expiry of their contracts after the prescribed period of two years, the contract of respondents were extended for a period of about seven months. However, neither was the employment of the respondents regularized nor were their contracts extended thereafter, and the Bank instead advertised vacancies for appointment in place of the respondents.

Applications that were invited by the Bank and made by the respondents were, to fill the positions of MTOs for operations of the Bank in Finance and Accounts and to catch the attention of the prospective candidates the phrase Career for Management Trainee Officers was printed on the top of the advertisement in bold letters. Further the offer/advertisement also promised payment of competitive remuneration. In response to the advertisement, the appellant-Bank received 8392 applications which were short listed to 1942. The candidates were further short listed for written test and thus 231 candidates were put to such test. Candidate securing 45% and above marks in the test were to be considered eligible for interview, however, keeping in view the vacancy position, only 30 candidates were called for interview conducted by the Designated Committee. On the recommendations of the Committee, the competent authority decided that the respondents may be considered for selection in the Head Office and the fields, and after that they may be preferred for posting in concerned zone with high merit. Trainees were to be accepted for on job training, initially for a period of two years and were to be considered for regular appointment on expiry of the contract period upon satisfactory performance and availability of vacancies and further that in case any management trainee failed to join, the next candidate with high merit may be offered the position for posting. Respondents were also required to furnish medical fitness certificate issued by the authorized medical practitioners.

Entire process commencing with the advertisement in newspaper and ending with the final selection and posting of the respondents, was a process of appointment to the post of officer and out of a large number of successful candidates, only 30 were inducted, as there were only such number of vacancies, however, the Bank instead of issuing appointment letters to the respondents made them sign contracts, which were clearly in conflict with the bank's promise of job to the eligible and selected candidates.

Respondents were posted in different branches of the Bank as Grade-II Officers, and as managers also. They were assigned the functions such as of sanctioning of loan, negotiating financial facility with the customers, evaluating securities, and recovery of the finance granted to the customers, and thus were functioning and discharging their duties with powers and authority as could have been done by any other officer/employee of the said grade in the Bank.

Bank had not claimed that there has been any complaint or dissatisfaction regarding the performance of the respondents. On the contrary, their performance had admittedly been satisfactory, and they had admittedly worked sincerely. Good performance of the respondents and their utility was also evident from the fact that upon expiry of the initial period their contracts were extended for a further term of about seven months.

Bank has had no mandate to conduct training for any individual other than its employees. Bank's claim that the respondents were selected merely for training and not for employment was in conflict with, rather beyond its mandate.

In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it was unfair to not confirm services of respondents. It was also against the interest of the bank to indulge in a fresh exercise of recruitment in place of the respondents which by itself shall be an expensive exercise both in terms of time, money and effort and so would be the ensuing training. Respondents had since their induction been performing their job satisfactorily, they had been trained by and for the Bank and had become familiar and acclimatized with the working and atmosphere of the Bank.

As regards the signing of the contract by the respondents, in a situation where the respondents after having been selected for a promised post, were offered a contract instead, and there being no equilibrium between the bargaining position of the respondents and the Bank, and keeping in view the rate of unemployment in the country, the respondents had no option but to sign the contract in order to avoid further disappointments and frustration by exposing themselves to unemployment. Signing of contracts by respondents, therefore, could not be allowed to be used as an obstructive instrument in their way of confirmation/regularization. Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Mian Muhammad Hanif, Advocate Supreme Court and Mehr Khan Malik, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

Muhammad Suleman Bhatti, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondents.