P L D 2016 Supreme Court 207
Present: Gulzar Ahmed and Dost Muhammad Khan, JJ
Malik MUZAFFAR AHMED---Appellant
Versus
MAJLIS-E-ILMI SOCIETY through Muhammad Zubair---Respondent
Civil Appeal No.1208 of 2011, decided on 15th December, 2015.
(On appeal from the judgment dated 29-11-2010 passed by the Lahore High Court Lahore in Civil Revision No.29 of 2008)
(a) Punjab Pre-emption Act (IX of 1991)---
----S. 23(1)---Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pre-emption Act (X of 1987), S.23(1)(a)---No right of pre-emption in respect of 'sale' of waqf property or property used for charitable, religious or public purpose [section 23(1)(a) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991]---Inadvertent omission on part of draftsman in not adding the word`purchase' after the word 'sale' in S.23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991---Word, purchase had been omitted from S.23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 due to mistake, albeit inadvertently on the part of the drafter---Section 23(1) of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pre-emption Act, 1987, which was similar to S.23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 did contain the word 'purchase'---Words 'purchase', thus also had to be supplied to S.23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 to render the said provision of law meaningful, so to give effect to the intent of the Legislature---Accordingly, the word purchase must be read in the provision of S.23(1) of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 and in the head-notes appended to it.


Section 23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 provided that there was no right of pre-emption in respect of 'sale' of waqf property or property used for charitable, religious or public purpose, whereas a similar provision i.e. section 23(1) of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pre-emption Act, 1987 provided that there was no right of pre-emption in respect of 'sale' or 'purchase' of waqf property or property used for charitable, religious or public purpose. Provision of section 23 of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 suffered from absurdity, ambiguity and inadvertent omission on the part of the drafter because along with the word 'sale' the word, 'purchase' was not added.


Giving exemption from right of pre-emption to properties purchased by a charitable or religious institutions, was the clear intent and object of the Legislature because such purchased properties were used for charitable religious and public benefit and not for monetory or financial gain.


Word, purchase mentioned in section 23(1) of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pre emption Act, 1987, had been omitted from the similar provision of section 23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 due to mistake, albeit inadvertently on the part of the drafter, thus, it was fully justified to supply the omission, rendering section 23(1) of Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 meaningful, workable and sensible, so to give effect to the intent of the Legislature. Accordingly, the word purchase must be read in the provision of section 23 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 and in the head-notes appended to it.


Supreme Court directed that Provincial Government should bring necessary amendments in the provision of section 23 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 by adding the word, 'purchase' to avoid future unnecessary litigation in such regard.

 

(b) Interpretation of statutes ---

 

----Inadvertent omission in a statute---Courts had the power to fill-up an omission/lacuna in a statute through necessary implied addition to give effect to the true meaning of the Legislature.


Where there was inadvertent omission on the part of the drafter in a statute and if interpretation on such account was placed in a way to give effect to the omission, not only would it defeat the intention of the Legislature but would also result in harmful drastic consequences.ln such a case it became imperative for the Courts to fill-up the gap and to supply the omission, so to avoid the obvious destructive effect on the true intent of the Legislature. In a case of ambiguity and absurdity or inadvertent omission, the Court had to make departure from the plain meaning of the statute and should adopt a construction, which furthered and carried the object of the Legislature into effect by resorting to drawing inference therefrom. Courts had the power to fill-up a lacuna in a statute through necessary implied addition.


In cases where there was a manifest contradiction of the apparent purposes of the enactment or the literal construction was likely to lead to a result not intended by the Legislature, the court had the power to modify the meaning of the words or to supply the obvious omission due to result of inadvertent mistake on the part of the drafter. In the cases of inadvertent legislative omissions, which defeated the very object of the whole scheme of law, the Courts had the powers to supply the omissions, making the statute purpose oriented, workable and sensible, by giving effect to the legislative intent.


Al-Jehad Trust v. The Federation of Pakistan PLD 1996 SC 324 and Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan PLD 1996 SC 473 ref.


Khawaja Saeed-uz-Zafar, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.


Raja Muhammad Irshad, Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent.


Date of hearing: 15th December, 2015.
