 
2015 S C M R 1418
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Anwar Zaheer Jamali, Ejaz Afzal Khan and Mushir Alam, JJ
Mst. BASHARAT JEHAN---Appellant
versus
DIRECTOR-GENERAL, FEDERAL GOVERNMENT EDUCATION, FGEI (C/Q) RAWALPINDI and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1184 of 2011, decided on 11th July, 2014.
(Against judgment dated 14-1-2011 of Federal Service Tribunal, Islamabad passed in Appeal No.325(P)CS/2010)

 

(a) Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973---

 

----R. 3(2)---Civil service---Initial appointment---Relaxation in age prescribed for initial appointment--- Typographical error in advertisement for post qua upper age limit of applicant---Vested right of civil servant on issuance of appointment letter and joining of service---Scope--- Appellant applied for the position of Assistant Librarian (BPS-9)---Besides other educational qualifications, upper age limit for the advertised post was mentioned as 35 years, which could only be relaxed in exceptional cases---Appellant, who was 37 years of age, qualified the written test and interview and was selected for the post on merits---Appellant was issued appointment letter and accordingly joined service---Along with her joining, appellant furnished certificate of age relaxation to the authorities---After joining the service, appellant was issued a show-cause notice and consequently removed from service on the ground of being over age at the time of initial appointment---Contentions of appellant were that she was 37 years of age at the time of applying for the post and was entitled for general relaxation of 5 years of age as per Government Policy, which was applicable on all the departments under the Federal Government[Federal Government notification/Office Memorandum No.F.9/2/9 R5 dated 28th November, 2000]; that another applicant, who was 39 years of age at the time of applying for the post, was issued appointment letter without any exception, therefore, present case was one of discrimination---Contentions on behalf of Federal Government were that originally age for the advertised position was 25 years, which was increased to 30 years as per the notification in question; that mentioning of 35 years as the upper age limit for the advertised post was a typo-error, as such appellant could not be extended further age relaxation---Validity---Appellant had not procured her appointment letter through dubious means, and she could not be attributed any wrong on her part---Government department could not be allowed to take benefit of its own oversight, lapse or ignorance of law (i.e. Office Memorandum No.F.9/2/9 R5 dated 28th November, 2000 regarding relaxation of general age]---If the notification/memorandum in question had gone unnoticed by the Government department, it was not the fault of appellant---Liability for wrongly mentioning the qualifying age in the advertisement as 35 years could not be attributed to the appellant, and no corrigendum was published in the newspapers to such an effect---Appellant had joined the service after appearing in the test and qualifying in the interview---For a period of seven months (i.e. from the last date for applying for the advertised post till date of issuance of appointment letter to appellant), it did not occur to the Government department that appellant was over aged by two years (37 years) as against the age of 35 years as advertised---In terms of Chapter-II of National Command Authority Rules, para 7(K) for initial appointment the age prescribed was not less than 18 years or more than 35 years of age---However it was specifically stipulated in the said Rule that the said age limit may be relaxed in exceptional cases upto 45 years by the competent authority---Said Rule was not considered by the Government department in the present case---Government department did not dispute that the appellant did not possess the required qualification for the relevant post and/or that she did not serve the department satisfactorily---Appellant had applied for the advertised post giving her full particulars, including her qualification and age---At the time of joining she submitted the age relaxation certificate---Even if it is presumed that the competent authority over-sighted her age, it would be deemed to have been relaxed in exercise of power vested in the authority---Under the facts and circumstances of the present case, a right had come to vest in the appellant on issuance of appointment letter and more so after joining the service---Another applicant, who was 39 years of age at the time of applying for the post in question, was appointed to the post and no exception to her being over-age was taken by the Government department---Appellant, in such circumstances, was justified to urge that she had been discriminated against---General benefit of age relaxation extended to the employees of the Federal Government across the board, and extended to all departments under the Federal government pursuant to any policy decision could not be denied on the assumption, that particular department was not bound by such decision as it had its own rules---Nothing was brought on record to show that such directive/policy decision expressed through memorandum/notification was not applicable to the Government department in question---Supreme Court directed that appellant shall be given joining within one month from date of present judgment; that her seniority would be counted from the date of her appointment letter, and that no back benefit will be extended to her for the period she remained out of office one month from the date of present order---Appeal was allowed accordingly.

 

Ghulam Murtaza v. Federation of Pakistan 2011 PLC (C.S.) 709; Civil Petitions Nos. 426-K to 436-K of 2008 and Muhammad Farooq M. Memon v. Government of Sindh 1986 CLC 1482 ref.

 

(b) Civil service---

 

----Appointment letter, cancellation of---Scope---Vested right of appointment---Once a person was appointed after fulfilling all the codal formalities and appointment letter was issued, a vested right was created and appointment letter could not be withdrawn.

 

Ghulam Murtaza v. Federation of Pakistan 2011 PLC (C.S.) 709; Civil Petitions Nos. 426-K to 436-K of 2008 and Muhammad Farooq M. Memon v. Government of Sindh 1986 CLC 1482 ref.

 

(c) Civil service---

 

----Appointment--- Vested right of appointment--- Scope--- Locus poenitentiae, doctrine of---Once a right was accrued to a civil servant by appointment letter issued to him after complying with all the codal formalities, the same could not be taken away on mere assumption, supposition, whims and fancy of any executive functionary---Such right once vested, could not be destroyed or withdrawn as legal bar would come into play under the doctrine of locus poenitentiae.

 

Director, Social Welfare, N.-W.F.P. Peshawar v. Sadullah Khan 1996 SCMR 1350 ref.

 

Ghulam Nabi Khan, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG for Respondents.

 

Date of hearing: 11th July, 2014.
