P L D 2017 Supreme Court 121
Present: Dost Muhammad Khan, Qazi Faez Isa and Faisal Arab, JJ
RASHEED AHMAD---Appellant
Versus
FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN through Secretary, Ministry of Information, Broadcasting and National Heritage, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No.1216 of 2015, decided on 3rd February, 2017.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 6-10-2015 passed by the Islamabad High Court, Islamabad, in I.C.A. No.267 of 2015)
(a) Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance (XIII of 2002)---
----Ss. 6(2), 7 & 10---Chairman of Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA), dismissal of---Misconduct---Serving Government servant appointed as Chairman, PEMRA---Non-disclosure of personal interest---Appellant in his position as Secretary to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting recommended himself to be appointed to the position of Chairman, PEMRA---Summary which the appellant prepared for such purpose attempted to give it a veneer of credibility by proposing three names, however, its author (the appellant) did not specifically disclose his personal interest---Appellant was in Government service when he proposed his name for the post of Chairman PEMRA, and subsequently when he was appointed to such post, he violated another rule, which was not having obtained the prior written permission before applying---Appellant, therefore, committed misconduct as he had violated S.10 of the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance, 2002 (the Ordinance) by continuing in Government service whilst holding the position of Chairman, PEMRA---Appellant claimed that he had relinquished charge of the Government before assuming the charge of the post of Chairman PEMRA, however relinquishment of charge did not sever the appellant from Government service---Appellant's appointment was also in violation of SI. No. 140 of Vol. 1 of the Esta Code which prescribed the, Procedure Regarding Appointments in Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies, under the Federal Government---Section 6(2) of the Ordinance set out the qualifications of Chairman, PEMRA who, shall be an eminent professional of known integrity and competence having substantial experience in media, business, management, finance, economics or law---Appellant could not be categorized as an eminent professional having substantial experience in any of the areas mentioned in S.6(2) of the Ordinance---Rules of natural justice were fully complied by the inquiry officer; show cause notice was served upon the appellant, and reply submitted by the appellant was duly considered---Inquiry officer provided more than one opportunity of personal hearing to the appellant but he did not avail such opportunities---Inquiry report recommended the dismissal of the appellant from the position of Chairman, PEMRA and the Prime Minister accepted his recommendation and advised the President to remove him and the President accepted his advice---Appeal filed by appellant against his dismissal as Chairman, PEMRA was dismissed accordingly.

Badshah Gul Wazir v. Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 2015 SCMR 43; Secretary to Government of N.W.F.P. v. Sadullah Khan 1996 SCMR 413; Collector of Customs and Central Excise v. Abdul Waheed 2004 SCMR 303 and Muhammad Shoaib v. Government of N.W.F.P. 2005 SCMR 85 distinguished.

(b) Constitution of Pakistan---

----Arts. 100 & 140---Attorney-General for Pakistan (Terms and Conditions) Rules, 2011, R. 4---Central Law Officers Ordinance (VII of 1970), S.2(1)---Additional Attorney-General, Deputy Attorney-General and Standing Counsel Rules, 2011, R. 4(1)---Practice in Federal/Provincial Government departments of engaging private counsel---Supreme Court deprecated such practice by observing that Federal Government and the Provincial Governments had a host of law officers who were paid out of the public exchequer; that if a government contends that none amongst its law officers were capable of handling cases then the question would arise why had incompetent persons been appointed; that in such a scenario the public suffered twice, firstly, they had to pay for incompetent law officers, and secondly, they had to pay again for the services of competent counsel the government engaged; that the public exchequer could not be squandered in such manner, and the State must protect its belongings and assets and those of citizens from waste and malversation; that the Constitution, the Rules of Business, the Attorney-General for Pakistan (Terms and Conditions) Rules, 2011, the Central Law Officers Ordinance, 1970 and the Additional Attorney-General, Deputy Attorney-General and Standing Counsel Rules, 2011 did not specifically permit the Federal Government to engage a private counsel, therefore such practice must stop---Supreme Court further observed that there may however be cases which involved complicated questions of the Constitution or some extremely technical law which the Attorney General or the Advocate General, and their law officers did not have the requisite ability to attend to, in such a case the concerned constitutional office holder should certify that he and the law officers did not have the requisite expertise in the field and that the engagement of a private counsel who was competent and experienced was required; that the engagement of private counsel could only be sanctioned for compelling reasons and in the public interest and not to protect or save a particular individual or for any other ulterior reason; that if such procedure or a better one prescribed by the government was not followed before engaging a private advocate then any statement made before a court or comments/written statement that were filed would not be binding on the concerned government; that to pay the fee of such private advocate would constitute financial impropriety by the person who did so on behalf of the government, subjecting him/her to disciplinary action in accordance with the applicable law---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2012 SC 132; Mahmood Akhtar Naqvi v. Government of Sindh 2015 SCMR 810; Punjab Agriculture (Bagh-e-Jinnah) v. Registrar of Trade Unions 1997 PLC 579 and Mumtaz Rasool Mir v. Tariq Mir PLD 2011 SC (AJ&K) 36 ref.

Waseem Sajjad, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Ahmed Nawaz Ch., Advocate-on-Record (absent) for Appellant.

Sohail Mehmood, D.A.G. and Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Respondents Nos. 1 and 4.

Hafiz S.A. Rehman, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Mehmood Ahmed Sheikh, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent No.5.

Nemo for Respondents Nos. 2 and 6.
