2016 S C M R 2031
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Amir Hani Muslim and Mushir Alam, JJ
The STATE through Chairman NAB---Appellant
Versus
HANIF HYDER and another---Respondents
C.A. No. 82-K of 2015, decided on 2nd September, 2016.
(Against the impugned judgment passed by High Court of Sindh at Karachi in C.P. No. D-3184 of 2011 on 15-5-2013)
(a) National Accountability Ordinance (XVIII of 1999)---

----S. 9 & Preamble---Object of National Accountability Ordinance, 1999---Said Ordinance was primarily legislated to counter mega scandals and book the persons who were involved in such scandals of corruption and corrupt practices---Supreme Court observed that the record of enquiries and investigations being undertaken by the National Accountability Bureau at present showed that prima facie such enquiries and investigations were not of mega scandals and apparently petty matters had been enquired into on the complaints, and that this was not the wisdom behind legislation of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999.

(b) National Accountability Ordinance (XVIII of 1999)---

----Ss. 9 & 25(a)---Corruption and corrupt practices by public servant/civil servant---Option of Voluntary Return of the assets or gains acquired by an accused---Propriety---Provisions of S. 25(a) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 empowered the Bureau to accept the offer of an accused person of 'Voluntary Return' of the assets or gains acquired by him---Once an accused who was alleged to have plundered colossal sums of money, deposited a portion of such amount determined by Chairman of the Bureau voluntarily, that too, in installments, he stood discharged from all his liability in respect of the matter or transaction in issue and went back to join his job---Provisions of S. 25(a) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 were not meant to allow corrupt public servants who minted money through corruption or corrupt practices to get a clean chit from the NAB authorities by paying portion of such alleged amount in terms of S.25(a) of the said Ordinance---No departmental proceedings were initiated against any such accused (public servants), who entered into Voluntary Return---Option of Voluntary Return by a public servant and or a civil servant fell within the ambit of misconduct and needed to be departmentally proceeded against once he admitted that he had earned money by corruption---After admitting such fact, public servant could not hold any public office either in Federal or in Provincial Government or in any state owned organization---Supreme Court observed that frequent exercise of powers of Voluntary Return by the Chairman of the Bureau had in fact multiplied corruption on the one side and defeated the object of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 on the other.

(c) National Accountability Ordinance (XVIII of 1999)---

----Ss. 9 & 25(a)---Corruption and corrupt practices---Option of Voluntary Return of the assets or gains acquired by an accused---Vires of---Provisions of S. 25(a) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999, which authorized the Chairman NAB to accept the offer of 'Voluntary Return' from a person of the amount illegally earned by him, prima facie was in conflict with the provisions of the Constitution---Such power could only be exercised by a judicial forum as after payment of Voluntary Return, the person went scot-free without any stigma on his career and could contest the elections and or could continue in public office, as S. 25(a) did not provide any disqualification---Furthermore there was no yardstick provided in National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 and the rules framed thereunder for determining the amount of Voluntary Return--- Supreme Court directed the office to place present order before the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, for passing appropriate orders to treat present matter as a suo motu petition, and lay down principles regarding cognizance by the Bureau in corruption matters under S. 9 of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 and to further examine whether the Bureau could extend its jurisdiction to take cognizance of the cases which fell within the domain of the Anti-Corruption authorities and or the Federal Investigation Agency---Supreme Court directed the Federal and Provincial Governments and the Bureau to furnish certain details in such regard.

Waqas Qadeer Dar, P.G. NAB, Col. (R) Sirajul Nadeem, DG NAB, Najam Din Junejo, Deputy Director NAB, Noor Muhammad Dayo, Special Prosecutor NAB and Syed Amjad Ali Shah, DPG NAB for Appellant.

Respondents Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 in person.

Zamir Ghumro, A.G. Sindh, Syed Israr Ali, Additional Director FIA, Asim Khan, Director (S)FIA and Ghulam Qadir Thebo, Chairman, ACE Sindh on Court's Notice.
