2017 S C M R 571
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Mushir Alam and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
MUHAMMAD ZAMAN and others---Appellants
Versus
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN through Secretary, Finance Division (Regulation Wing), Islamabad and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1313 of 2014, decided on 21st February, 2017.
(Against the judgment dated 15.5.2014 of the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar passed in W.P. No. 1882-P/2013)
(a) State Bank of Pakistan Act (XXXIII of 1956)---

----S. 54(1) [as amended by the State Bank of Pakistan (Amendment) Act (II of 1994)]---State Bank of Pakistan Officers (Pension-cum-Gratuity) Regulations, 1980 (Regulations)---Scope---State Bank of Pakistan Officers (Pension-cum-Gratuity) Regulations, 1980 were instructions for the internal control or management of the State Bank of Pakistan and were therefore non-statutory---Before the amendment made to S. 54(1) of the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956, the Bank could only make regulations with the approval of the Federal Government, however by virtue of the State Bank of Pakistan (Amendment) Act, 1994, the words subject to the approval of the Federal Government were omitted---Such omission was significant, conferring greater autonomy on the Central Board of Directors of State Bank of Pakistan and the Federal Government was removed from the regulation-making process, and full authority came to vest in the Board to make such regulations---Amendment made to S. 54(1) of the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956, suggested that the intention of the legislature was to exclusively clothe the Bank with the power to frame regulations to carry out the objects and purpose of the Act---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Chief Manager, State Bank of Pakistan, Lahore and another v. Muhammad Shafi 2010 SCMR 1994 ref.

(b) Interpretation of Rules/Regulations---

----Statutory or non-statutory nature, determination of---Test of whether rules/regulations were statutory or otherwise was not solely whether their framing required the approval of the Government or not, rather it was the nature and efficacy of such rules/regulations---Court had to see whether the rules/regulations dealt with instructions for internal control or management, in which case they would be non-statutory, or they were broader than and were complementary to the parent statute in matters of crucial importance, in which event they would be statutory.

Shafique Ahmed Khan and others v. NESCOM through Chairman, Islamabad and others PLD 2016 SC 377 ref.

Abdul Rahim Bhatti, Advocate Supreme Court and Abdul Rehman Khan, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellants.

Syed Nayab Hassan Gardezi, Standing Counsel, M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record and Abid Hussain Channa, S.O. Finance for Respondent No.1.

Kh. Muhammad Farooq, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Raja Abdul Ghafoor, Advocate-on-Record for Respondents Nos. 2 to 4.