P LD 2018 Supreme Court 28
Present: Mushir Alam, Dost Muhammad Khan and Sajjad Ali Shah, JJ
CHAIRMAN, NAB---Appellant
Versus
MUHAMMAD USMAN and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1085 of 2017, decided on 21st September, 2017.
(On appeal from the order dated 18.4.2017 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in W.P. No. 1230-P of 2017)
(a) Qanun-e-Shahadat (10 of 1984)---
----Art. 133---Cross-examination of witnesses---Courts, duty of---Scope---Courts were required to guard and protect the witnesses against undue harassment and undesirable cross-examination, which was not relevant to the fact in issue but directed against the witnesses to put them under unnecessary strain and stress.

(b) Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)---

----S. 540---Power of court to summon material witness or examine person present --- Scope --- Role of the court under the provisions of S. 540, Cr.P.C. was inquisitorial where it endeavoured to discover the truth, suppressed by one or both parties to the case so as to incapacitate the court to reach a just conclusion---In exercising inquisitorial powers, the law had imposed obligation on the court to discover the truth and to secure the ends of justice---Witnesses examined under S. 540, Cr.P.C. were examined as 'court witnesss' and not for the prosecution or defence, therefore, none of the parties to a case could claim such a right.

(c) Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)---

----S. 540---Power of court to summon witness dropped by the prosecution---Scope---Where the prosecution had dropped any material witness whose evidence, if given, may have a direct bearing on the end result of the case, the Court had unfettered powers to summon and examine such witness only for the purpose of discovery of truth, and for the purpose of doing complete justice---Such powers, however was not to be exercised at random and without application of proper judicial mind with reasonable depth to the facts of each case---Written request had to be made to the Court showing cogent and convincing reasons for calling and examining any witness of the prosecution, not examined or who had already been examined, to be re-examined as court witness.

(d) Qanun-e-Shahadat (10 of 1984)---

----Art. 133---Examination of witnesses---Defence calling a prosecution witness as its own (defence) witness---Legality---Such practice was not acknowledged by law and could not be approved.

(e) Constitution of Pakistan---

----Art. 199---Power of judicial review vested in the High Court under Art. 199 of the Constitution---Scope---Such power should not be exercised in a case where discretion was exercised by the subordinate court/tribunal in a fair and just manner without violating or disregarding statutory provision of law, likely to occasion the failure of justice.

Brig. (Retd.) Imtiaz Ahmed v. Government of Pakistan, through Secretary, Interior Division, Islamabad 1994 SCMR 2142; Shahnaz Bequm v. The Hon'ble Judges of the High Court of Sindh and Balochistan PLD 1971 SC 677 and Malik Shauktat Ali Dogar v. Ghulam Qasim Khan Khakwani PLD 1994 SC 281 ref.

(f) Administration of justice---

----Duty of judge to apply the correct law---Scope---Law was written on the sleeves of the judges and it was the primary duty of a judge to apply the correct law to a case before it---Party involved in a case was not bound to engage a counsel for telling the Court how a particular law was to be applied and how the jurisdiction was to be exercised.

Arshad Qayyum, Special Prosecutor for Appellant.

Shumail Butt, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
