
P L D 2016 Supreme Court 79
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Iqbal Hemeedur Rahman and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
Syed HAFEEZUDDIN---Appellant
Versus
ABDUL RAZZAQ and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1086 of 2014, decided on 19th November, 2015.
(Against the judgment dated 7-8-2014 of the Election Tribunal, Karachi passed in Election Petition No.7 of 2013)
(a) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---
----Ss. 68 & 69---Grounds for declaring a person other than a returned candidate elected---Scope---Onus on runner-up candidate/any contesting candidate to prove his entitlement to be declared as the winner instead of the returned candidate---Declaration to such effect could not be made by Election Tribunal as a matter of course, and runner-up candidate/any contesting candidate must prove his entitlement to be declared returned candidate by setting out his own reasons and positive evidence to such effect.


Once any of the grounds enumerated in section 68 of Representation of the People Act, 1976, had been established through quality evidence (by the petitioner/runner-up candidate), the obvious consequence as per the law shall thus be to declare the election of returned candidate as void. While passing such order the Tribunal under section 69 of the said Act was duly empowered to declare the election petitioner/runner-up candidate or any of the contesting candidates as the returned candidate, but it may make such declaration only if a claim in such regard had been set out by them. Furthermore, such declaration shall not be made as a matter of course or a right or ipso facto rather only in the circumstances of the case where the election petitioner or the respondent of the election petition was able to substantiate and make out a case qua his entitlement to the satisfaction of the Tribunal. Such entitlement shall be dependant on the facts and circumstances of each case; the reasons set out and proof for the entitlement thereof. Thus the grant of relief to the election petitioner or any other respondent in the election petition under the provisions of section 69 of Representation of the People Act, 1976, must be proved on the strength of their own entitlement to get elected in place of the returned candidate.


Syed Saeed Hassan v. Pyar Ali and 7 others PLD 1976 SC 6 and Dr. Sheela B. Charles v. Qaisar Ifraeem Soraya and another 1996 SCMR 1455 ref.

 

(b) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 68, 69 & 70---Grounds for declaring a person other than a returned candidate elected---Grounds for declaring election as a whole void---Scope---While considering the parameters of S.69 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, particularly with respect to the runner up candidate (and not any of the other candidates) and where the returned candidate had been found to be disqualified and his election had been declared as void, it was not the case that the votes of the returned candidate (who had been disqualified and whose election as a returned candidate had been declared to be void under S.68) were to be simply disregarded or discarded on the doctrine of throw away votes and the runner up was to be automatically declared as the duly elected returned candidate by virtue of having secured the next highest number of votes; rather the notoriety of the disqualification amongst the voters at the time of polling had to be examined and if the disqualification was found to be notorious (apparent or known to the public), only then could the votes of a winner of an election be thrown away, and the runner up be declared to be the duly elected returned candidate---Where the disqualification was not notorious and depended on legal argument or upon complicated facts and inferences, then the runner up could not be declared to be the duly elected returned candidate, as the possibility could not be ruled out that any of the other candidates could have won the elections, hence the election must be declared to be void as a whole and fresh elections must take place.

 

Rashid Ahmad Rahmani v. (1) Mirza Barkat Ali, (2) Master Fazal Elahi and (3) The Additional Commissioner, Lahore PLD 1968 SC 301; Lal Muhammad v. Muhammad Usman and others 1975 SCMR 409; Muhammad Ilyas v. The Returning Officer and others 1981 SCMR 233; Junaid Ahmad Soomro v. Haji Mehboob Ali Bhayo and others PLD 1986 SC 698; Sahibzada Tariqullah v. Haji Amanullah Khan and others PLD 1996 SC 717; Engr. Iqbal Zafar Jhagra and others v. Khalilur Rehman and 4 others 2000 SCMR 250; Ellahi Bakhsh v. District and Sessions Judge, Rajanpur/Election Tribunal, Dera Ghazi Khan and others PLD 2003 SC 268; Mian Ahmed Saeed and others v. Election Tribunal for Kasur at Okara and 7 others 2003 SCMR 1611; Sh. Amjad Aziz v. Haroon Akhtar Khan and 10 others 2004 SCMR 1484; Bashir Ahmed Bhanban and another v. Shaukat Ali Rajpur and others PLD 2004 SC 570; Shaukat Ali and another v. District Returning Officer and another PLD 2006 SC 78; Imtiaz Ahmed Lali v. Ghulam Muhammad Lali PLD 2007 SC 369 and Chaudhry Muhammad Munir and others v. Election Tribunal, Mandi Bahauddin and others 2009 SCMR 1368 ref.

 

(c) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 70(b), 78 & 83---'Corrupt' and 'illegal' practices---Proof---Positive evidence---No inferences---Rules of proof for the grounds challenging the election which were founded on corrupt and illegal practices were quite strict and stringent and the allegations in such regard must be absolutely proved through positive evidence without accepting any inferences and if there was any doubt, the benefit must go to the person against whom corrupt or illegal practices were being alleged.

 

Syed Saeed Hassan v. Pyar Ali and 7 others PLD 1976 SC 6; Muhammad Saeed and 4 others v. (1) Election Petitions Tribunal, West Pakistan, (2) Mehr Muhammad Arif Khan, (3) Ghulam Haider and (4) West Pakistan Government and others PLD 1957 SC (Pak.) 91; Mian Jamal Shah v. (1) The Member Election Commission, Government of Pakistan, Lahore, (2) The Returning Officer, Constituency of the National Assembly of Pakistan No. NW-II, Peshawar II, and (3) Khan Nasrullah Khan PLD 1966 SC 1 and Khan Muhammad Yusuf Khan Khattak v. S. M. Ayub and 2 others PLD 1973 SC 160) ref.

 

(d) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 38(9), 68 & 83(b)---Lapses/anomalies committed by Presiding Officer of a polling station benefiting the returned candidate---No direct evidence to prove that returned candidate obtained or procured the assistance of the Presiding Officer to secure his election---No inference could be drawn in absence of positive evidence that such lapses were done in connivance or collusion with the returned candidate---Possibility existed that the lapses committed by the Presiding Officer were bona fide mistakes or due to lack of proper skill and adequate knowledge or expertise---Lapses on part of Presiding Officer could not be termed as 'illegal practices' in such circumstances---Since there was doubt with respect to proof of the allegations of illegal practice and connivance and collusion, the benefit of such doubt should be given to the returned candidate---Election of the returned candidate was not liable to be declared as void under S.68 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976.

 

Allegation against the Presiding Officer of a polling station was that she did not fill up the statement of count; that the runner-up candidate's name was not mentioned in the statement of count; that she signed hand-written results and provided them to the polling agents of the runner-up candidate in which the count was different from that in Form-XIV, and that statement of count pertaining to the votes cast in favour of the candidate of the National Assembly was absolutely different from the votes of the Provincial Assembly.

 

Perusal of evidence given by the Presiding Officer in question suggested that she admitted to overwriting on figures in Form-XIV to make corrections; admitted to writing the figure 1,600 on one page of Form-XIV of polling station in question and the figure 1,700 on the other page; admitted to the errors in calculation while attributing it to absence of a calculator and lack of sufficient light due to a power breakdown; admitted that the Form-XIV was not entirely prepared by her, in that the candidates' names were written by the Assistant Presiding Officer, but the rest including her name and signature were in her own handwriting; and that she attributed the absence of the runner-up candidate's name from the Form-XIV to the fact that she was not aware that he was contesting from the said constituency. Even if such lapses occurred, they certainly did not fall within the definition of illegal practice contained in section 83(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, as they did not constitute obtaining or procuring or attempting to obtain or procure the assistance of any person in the service of Pakistan to further or hinder the election of candidate. With regard to the argument that the Presiding Officer had prepared her affidavit in the returned candidate's office and did not appear as an official witness which fact indicated connivance and collusion with the returned candidate, they were mere inferences, which were neither positive nor conclusive evidence of the fact that she colluded and connived with the returned candidate, and that he obtained or procured the assistance of the Presiding Officer to secure his election as a returned candidate. Argument of runner-up candidate regarding the difference between the statements of count of National and Provincial constituencies, which purportedly reflected that Presiding Officer had committed an illegality vis-a-vis the proper count and preparation of Form-XIV, was a plain inference, not backed by sufficient evidence.

 

Runner-up candidate conceded that there was no evidence to directly prove that there was connivance between the returned candidate and the Presiding Officer, and that his allegations were based on inferences which should be necessarily drawn because of the conduct of the Presiding Officer.

 

Sardar Abdul Hafeez Khan v. Sardar Muhammad Tahir Khan Loni and 13 others 1999 SCMR 284 distinguished.

 

Even if an inference was to be drawn, it could only be so done where there was only one possible conclusion that could be reached, warranting proof through circumstantial as opposed to direct evidence. Fact that certain lapses/anomalies were committed by the Presiding Officer of a polling would not automatically lead to the conclusion that such was done in connivance or collusion with or on the instructions of the returned candidate. There was the possibility that the lapses committed by the Presiding Officer were bona fide mistakes or due to lack of proper skill and adequate knowledge or expertise as to how to do the needful, or as a result of miscalculation of votes or lack of sufficient light due to a power breakdown. Possibility could not be ruled out that any one of the candidates in the election colluded with the election staff at one polling station and had certain violations of the election law committed such as the wrong filling up of Form-XIV and by taking premium and advantage of their own fraud ultimately used this as a tool for having the election of the returned candidate declared as void. Since there was more than one possibility as to what could have happened on the day of election vis- -vis counting of votes and preparation of statement of count, one could not draw such inferences.

 

Runner-up candidate was required to produce strict positive evidence in order to prove its serious allegations of illegal practice against the returned candidate. Evidence on record clearly suggests that there was doubt with respect to proof of the allegations of illegal practice and connivance and collusion, the benefit of which should have been given to the returned candidate. To hold, in the circumstances, that the returned candidate had obtained or procured the assistance of the Presiding Officer would be against the spirit of the law and against the settled norms of justice.

 

Since the lapses on part of Presiding Officer did not constitute illegal practices as contemplated by the provisions of section 83 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, the election of the returned candidate was not liable to be declared as void under section 68 of the said Act. Appeal was allowed accordingly.

 

(e) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----Ss. 38(9) & 70(a)---Grounds for declaring election as a whole void---Scope---Lapses/anomalies committed by Presiding Officer of a polling station in relation to preparation of statement of count---Such lapses/anomalies did indicate a failure on behalf of Presiding Officer to comply with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, but it did not materially affect the election---Even if votes of the disputed polling station were excluded from the total vote count of the returned candidate, he still had winning margin---Election as whole could not be declared as void in such circumstances.

 

Section 70(a) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, provided for declaration of the election as a whole void if there was a failure of any person to comply with the provisions of the said Act or the Rules, provided that the election had been materially affected by such failure. Lapses/anomalies committed by the Presiding Officer of a polling station in the present case may at best indicate a failure on her behalf to comply with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1976, particularly section 38(9) which provided for preparation of statement of count by the Presiding Officer, thus the (first part of the) test that there must be a failure of any person to comply with the provisions of the Act/Rules, may be satisfied in the present case. However the second part of the test i.e. such non-compliance must have materially affected the election, was not satisfied in the present case. Even if (all the) 1400 votes of the disputed polling station were excluded from the total count of the returned candidate's votes of 15,432, reducing it to 14,032, the returned candidate would still win by a margin of 3,072 votes. Therefore, as the election would not be materially affected, there was no occasion to declare the election as a whole to be void under section 70(a) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976.

 

Sardar Abdul Hafeez Khan v. Sardar Muhammad Tahir Khan Loni and 13 others 1999 SCMR 284 distinguished.

 

Afzaal Ahmed Siddiqui, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Tariq Mehmood, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent No.1.

 

Date of hearing: 19th November, 2015.