P L D 2016 Supreme Court 454
Present: Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, Sardar Tariq Masood and Tariq Parvez, JJ
ABDUL HAMEED DOGAR---Appellant
Versus
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT through Secretary, Ministry of Interior and 2 others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No.118 of 2016, decided on 26th February, 2016.
(Against the judgment dated 9-12-2015 passed by the Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in Writ Petition No.3980 of 2015)
(a) Criminal law---
----Crime---'Aider and abettor' to the crime---'Beneficiary' of crime---Distinction---Person aiding or abetting another in an act was privy to the act itself but a beneficiary takes benefit or advantage of the act after the event and he may not necessarily be a party to the act itself.

 

General (R.) Parvez Musharraf v. Nadeem Ahmed (Advocate) and another PLD 2014 SC 585 ref.

 

(b) Criminal Law Amendment (Special Court) Act (XVII of 1976) ---

 

----Ss. 5(1) & 5(3)(a)---Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898), S. 202---High treason, offence of---Aiders and abettors---Trial before Special Court---Special Court, jurisdiction of---Scope--- Special Court ordering fresh investigation of the case for tracing role of appellant as an aider and abettor to the crime of high treason committed by accused---Leality---Fresh investigation into the offence of high treason by associating any person with the same laid within the prerogative of the Federal Government---Special Court constituted for trying persons accused of high treason or the High Court could not name any individual to be associated with any fresh investigation for determining his role as an aider or abettor to the offence---Moreover the Supreme Court and High Court in various judgments had fixed the entire and exclusive responsibility of committing high treason upon the accused---Supreme Court set aside all references to the appellant and two others in the impugned orders of Special Court and the High Court as suspects to be associated with any fresh investigation into the offence of high treason allegedly committed by accused.

 

In the present case Special Court had been constituted for trial of accused, who had allegedly committed the offence of high treason by issuing a Proclamation of Emergency in the country. Special Court ordered reinvestigation of the matter to trace whether certain co-accused persons and present- appellant, who was the then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, had aided and abetted the accused in committing offence of high treason. Constitutional petition filed by appellant against such order of Special Court was dismissed. Supreme Court observed that Federal Government had to consider the advisability or otherwise of getting a fresh investigation conducted for tracing out or identifying the aiders and abettors of the accused in the present matter. Special Court or the High Court could not require or approve a fresh investigation for such purposes.

 

Special Court had passed an earlier order whereby appellant was introduced in the case of high treason, but said order was set aside by the High Court. Despite setting aside of its earlier order the Special Court had reintroduced the appellant and two others as suspects in the case. After setting aside of its order the Special Court was left with no occasion whatsoever for reintroducing the appellant and two others as suspects in the case for the purposes of investigation qua their involvement in commission of the alleged offence. Conducting investigation into the matter was surely a prerogative of the Federal Government and the Special Court had no jurisdiction to direct the investigating agency to associate the appellant or any other particular person with such investigation.

 

There was no jurisdiction available with Special Court to direct an inquiry or investigation against a person or persons not formally complained against before the court. Apart from that an inquiry or investigation could be directed by the Special Court to be conducted before the issuance of process against the person complained against and not at a stage where the trial of the person complained against had already commenced and was nearing its conclusion, as in the present case.

 

Furthermore Supreme Court and High Court in various judgments had fixed the entire and exclusive responsibility of committing high treason upon the accused by stating that he had acted in his own discretion and for his own personal benefit. Supreme Court observed that as the trial of accused for the offence of high treason was presently pending before the Special Court, therefore, the present Bench of Supreme Court was restraining itself from recording its own opinions on the issue of aiders and abettors lest any opinion expressed may prejudice the case of the accused before the Special Court.

 

Sindh High Court Bar Association through its Secretary and another v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Law and Justice, Islamabad and others PLD 2009 SC 879; General (R.) Parvez Musharraf v. Nadeem Ahmed (Advocate) and another PLD 2014 SC 585; Maulvi Iqbal Haider v. Federation of Pakistan and others (Constitution Petition No.D-454 of 2009) and Maulvi Iqbal Haider and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary M/O Law and Justice and others 2013 SCMR 1683 ref

 

Supreme Court directed that all references to the appellant and two others in the impugned orders passed by the Special Court and the High Court respectively as suspects to be associated with any fresh investigation into the offence of high treason allegedly committed by accused were to be set aside; that the Special Court should proceed with the trial of accused with all convenient dispatch and without any unnecessary delay.

 

Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gilani, Senior Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Salman Aslam Butt, Attorney General for Pakistan for Respondent No.1.

 

Farogh Nasem, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent No.2.

 

Nemo for Respondent No.3.

 

Dates of hearing: 23rd and 24th February, 2016.
