2018 S C M R 1544
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Gulzar Ahmed, Maqbool Baqar and Munib Akhtar, JJ
COMMISSIONER INLAND REVENUE, KARACHI---Appellant
Versus
PAKISTAN BEVERAGES LIMITED, KARACHI---Respondent
Civil Appeal No. 116-K of 2016, decided on 14th June, 2018.
(On appeal from the judgment dated 13.8.2015 passed by the High Court of Sindh at Karachi in C.P. No. D-3977 of 2014)
(a) Administrative law---

----Discretionary power, exercise of---Scope---Law recognizes no such thing as an unfettered discretion---All discretionary powers, especially that as conferred by statute, must be exercised in terms of well-established principles of administrative law, which were of longstanding authority and had been developed, enunciated and articulated in many judgments of the Supreme Court.

(b) Administrative law---

----Discretionary power, exercise of---Scope---Discretionary statutory power could only be exercised on a ground or to achieve an object or purpose that was lawfully within the contemplation of the statute.

(c) Sales Tax Act (VII of 1990)---

----S. 40B---Posting of Inland Revenue Officers at premises of tax payer---Question as to whether such posting was time bound---Power under S. 40B of the Sales Tax, 1990 had been granted to monitor the production, sale of taxable goods and stock positions of a registered person or class of such persons, by posting Inland Revenue officers at the relevant premises---Such monitoring was not intended to be indefinite and could only be for some object, ground or purpose that was legitimately and lawfully within the contemplation of the Sales Tax Act, 1990---Once the purpose of monitoring had been served or object achieved or the ground stood exhausted, the monitoring must come to an end; it could not be left to the unfettered discretion of the Board, the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner (as the case may be) to determine when the purpose had been served or object achieved---Exercise of the power conferred by S. 40B was time bound in the sense that some timeframe or period must be given in any order made under the section---Relevant authority would always have the option to reassess the situation at or near the conclusion of the period, and if there were legitimate grounds for extension, then a further period may be granted---Equally, it would be open to the concerned person/taxpayer to challenge any exercise of the statutory power or any extension in the period, in accordance with law.

Muhammad Siddiq Mirza, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

Respondent ex parte.
