 
2016 S C M R 1332
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present Ejaz Afzal Khan, Sardar Tariq Masood and Faisal Arab, JJ
MUHAMMAD ARIF MUHAMMAD HASSANI---Appellant
Versus
AMANULLAH and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1033 of 2014, decided on 28th April, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 20-6-2014 passed by the Election Tribunal-II, Quetta in Election Petition No. 28 of 2013)

 

(a) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 70(b)---Ground for declaring election as a whole void---Allegation of corrupt and illegal practices---'Voting pattern' and 'voter turnout' in disputed and undisputed polling stations not phenomenally different---Principle laid down in the case of Khalid Hussain Magsi v. Mir Abdul Rahim Rind (2016 SCMR 900) would not apply in such circumstances to nullify the entire election result.

 

In the present case, there were 21899 registered votes in the disputed 25 polling stations and a total of 11570 votes were cast in these polling stations. The turnout at 25 disputed polling stations was 53% as against the turnout of 55% on the rest of the undisputed 48 polling stations. Thus it was apparent that on both the sets of polling stations no phenomenal difference in the polling pattern or the voters' turnout was noticeable.

 

If the voting pattern and the turnout of voters, on 25 disputed polling stations was compared with the voting pattern and the turnout on rest of the 48 polling stations, nothing phenomenal was noticeable to hold prevalence of corrupt practices so as to nullify the entire election result. Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

 

Khalid Hussain Magsi v. Mir Abdul Rahim Rind 2016 SCMR 900 distinguished.

 

(b) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 70(b)---Ground for declaring election as a whole void---Votes from disputed polling stations sent to National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) for counterfoil verification report---Report showing unauthenticated / invalid / duplicate / bogus votes---Such votes should not be deducted from the tally of returned candidate's vote count as a principle without any substantial evidence available on record.

 

Deducting disputed votes mentioned in NADRA's counterfoil verification report from the tally of the votes cast in favour of returned candidate would mean laying down a principle that all disputed votes on a certain set of polling stations should be deducted from the vote-count of such candidate who had secured the highest number of votes in such polling stations, in absence of the evidence as to which of the contesting party was involved in corrupt practices. One could not rule out the possibility that a candidate may still loose though he may have himself indulged in rigging practices. Without any substantial material coming on record it should not be assumed that the winning candidate had indulged in rigging. Winning candidate may also come up with his own list of selected polling stations of the constituency where the runner-up candidate (or election petitioner) had secured the highest number of votes in order to seek verification and then get all the disputed votes, in case such were pointed out by NADRA, deducted from the tally of votes bagged by the runner-up candidate (or election petitioner).

 

NADRA's verification report, in the present case, relating to election material of only 25 polling stations could not be made basis for nullifying the entire election result of the constituency. There had to be some convincing material on record to reach the conclusion that the election as a whole needed to be declared void. Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

 

(c) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 70(b)---Ground for declaring election as a whole void---Invalid votes---Counterfoil verification report prepared by National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA)---Counterfoils having invalid Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC) numbers---NADRA's report, in the present case, stated that 748 used counterfoils had invalid CNIC numbers---Said report described invalid CNIC numbers to mean such counterfoils on which either CNIC numbers did not relate to the voters of the constituency or on which CNIC numbers were missing---NADRA's report did not say that on the 748 counterfoils thumb impressions were missing or that the thumb impressions were not verifiable---Whether thumb impressions on all or some of these 748 counterfoils were found to be correct was not known---If thumb impressions on any of the 748 counterfoils had matched with that of the voters of the constituency then such votes could not be described as invalid votes, irrespective of the fact that they contained incorrect CNIC numbers or CNIC numbers were altogether missing---Reason being that the possibility that the polling staff may have incorrectly written or omitted to write CNIC numbers on these 748 counterfoils could not be ruled out---Returned candidate could not be penalized for such an error or omission---Figure of 748 votes, as contained in NADRA's report, could not be treated as invalid votes that were cast at the behest of returned candidate---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

 

Kamran Murtaza, Advocate Supreme Court and Qahir Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

 

Shakeel Ahmed, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Abdul Sattar, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent No.1.

 

Date of hearing: 6th April, 2016.
