2016 S C M R 222
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Iqbal Hameedur Rahman and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
Messrs BEACH LUXURY HOTELS, KARACHI---Appellant
Versus
Messrs ANAS MUNEER LTD. and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1137 of 2008, decided on 16th December, 2015.
(Against the judgment dated 25-4-2006 of the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in LPA No.169 of 1968)
Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act (XXVIII of 1958) [as amended]---

 

----S. 20 & Sched. Para. 9---Illegal transfer---Tranferee holding Provisional Transfer Order---Misrepresentation and fraud---Power of Settlement Department to re-open such a transfer and cancel the same---Legal entitlement of transferee/respondent in the present case only extended to one property, however he fraudulently got transferred two properties in his name from the Deputy Settlement Commissioner---Property purchased by the appellant in open auction included one of properties (disputed property) fraudulently and illegally transferred to the respondent---Respondent failed to establish his entitlement to the disputed property---Revenue records showed that disputed property was part of the hotel land purchased by the appellant in public auction---When the present matter was re-opened the Additional Settlement Commissioner re-examined all the facts pertaining to the title of the respondent and also of the appellant before deciding in favour of the appellant---Transfer of disputed property in favour of respondent had been rightly cancelled by the Settlement Department.


Respondent only had a Provisional Transfer Order in his favour, which contained a condition that in case the Settlement Department found that he had made any false representation, or concealment of a material fact, or fraud, it would be entitled to resume the property. Settlement Authorities had the inherent power to recall the impugned order in case of fraud or misrepresentation. Respondent had been allotted two plots, one of which (i.e. disputed plot) formed part of the hotel purchased by the appellant in a public auction. Respondent had illegally obtained two plots of land instead of one and hence the Settlement Department was entitled to cancel one of the two plots while leaving the other in his possession and ownership.


Respondent could not rely upon Municipal Tax record to prove that both plots formed part of the same property, as such record was not important for establishing question of title. Revenue records showed that disputed plot was part of the hotel bought by the appellant.


Settlement Department had exercised great care in relation to the auction of the hotel land.No allegations had been made for and in relation to the manner in which the auction was conducted. No fraud, misrepresentation or concealment by the appellant was either alleged by anyone or found by the Settlement Department to have taken place.


When the matter was re-opened the Additional Settlement Commissioner re-examined all the facts pertaining not merely to the title of the respondent but also of appellant from the very inception. Additional Settlement Commissioner also took technical assistance of the Land Acquisition and Control Officer, a Naib Tehsildar, a Revenue Patwari, and a Revenue Qaungo aided further by the Settlement Patwari before concluding the matter in favour of the appellant. On re-opening of present matter Settlement authorities examined the official plan of the premises on the basis of which the auction was held. Transfer of disputed property in favour of respondent had been rightly cancelled by the Settlement Department. Appeal was allowed accordingly.


Khalid Anwar, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.


Najam-ul-Hassan Kazmi, Senior Advocate Supreme Court for Respondents.


Date of hearing: 19th November, 2015.