2016 S C M R 662
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present Anwar Zaheer Jamali, C.J., Amir Hani Muslim and Iqbal Hameedur Rahman, JJ
Mst. SAADIA---Appellant
Versus
Mst. GUL BIBI---Respondent
Civil Appeal No. 194-P of 2010, decided on 18th December, 2015.
(On appeal from the judgment of Peshawar High Court, Peshawar, dated 24-11-2008 passed in C.R. No. 1575 of 2004)
(a) Gift---

 

----Gift deed, authenticity of---Prerequisites for valid gift i.e. offer, acceptance and delivery of possession not proved---Non-examination of attesting witnesses of gift deeds---Interested witnesses presented to prove execution of purported gift deeds---Non-production of original gift deeds along with the plaint---Evidence of Hand Writing Expert not helpful in circumstances where photostat copies of purported gift deeds were used for comparing signatures---Possibility of manipulation/substitution/subsequent addition of attesting witnesses could not be ruled out---Gift deeds could not be termed as valid in such circumstances

 

Three important prerequisites for valid gift i.e. offer, acceptance and delivery of possession had not been proved by the plaintiff and her witnesses in the present case.

 

Before the institution of suit by the plaintiff, the two purported gift deeds in her favour had not seen the light of the day in any manner/government record. Had the present case been a case of genuine gift in favour of plaintiff then there was no justification for her to withhold production of purported gift deeds for such a long period before filing the suit when all the attesting witnesses except one, had expired. Marginal witness of one of the purported gift deeds affirmed the fact that it was not signed by donor in presence of any person. Further, defendant was the only surviving legal heir of donor. Defendant was a minor at the time of donor's death and when she became major and agitated her claim over the suit house, plaintiff came out with the story of two gift deeds to legitimize her exclusive claim over the suit house. Original gift deeds were not produced along with the plaint even at evidence stage. Attesting witnesses of the two gift deeds were not examined. Evidence of witnesses appearing for the plaintiff was also of no help to the case of plaintiff to prove the authenticity or genuineness of the purported gift deeds.

 

Evidence of certain witnesses appearing on behalf of plaintiff revealed that they were interested witnesses installed for the purpose of justifying the execution and genuineness of the purported gift deeds. However, they also failed as their evidence was not confidence inspiring enough to prove the execution of purported gift deeds. Evidence of Hand Writing Expert was of no avail as all the documents sent to him; firstly, came from the possession of the plaintiff; secondly, the comparison of photostat copies with the originals was not warranted by law; and lastly such exercise was not a conclusive proof about the genuineness of one of the purported gift deeds.

 

Instead of following usual practice of having two attesting witnesses of purported gift deeds, they contained attestation by four witnesses at a time. For such reason too possibility of manipulation/ substitution/subsequent addition of other two witnesses could not be ruled out. Purported gift deeds could not be held to be valid in such circumstances.

 

(b) Registration Act (XVI of 1908)---

 

----Ss. 17 & 49---Oral gift, authenticity of---Unregistered gift deed executed between the donor and donee as an acknowledgment of past transaction of oral gift---Non-registration of such gift deed would not have much bearing as regards its authenticity or validity, however three important prerequisites for valid gift i.e. offer, acceptance and delivery of possession, had to be proved for such transaction to be valid.

 

Abdul Sattar Khan, Advocate Supreme Court and M. Ajmal Khan, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

 

Muhammad Shoaib Khan, Advocate Supreme Court and Muhammad Zahoor Qureshi, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent.

 

Date of hearing: 15th December, 2015.
