2016 S C M R 1021
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Amir Hani Muslim and Iqbal Hameedur Rahman, JJ
GOVERNMENT OF KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA through Chief Secretary, Peshawar and others---Appellants
Versus
HAYAT HUSSAIN and others---Respondents
Civil Appeals Nos. 1213 and 1214 of 2015, decided on 25th February, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 28-5-2014 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar, in W.Ps. Nos. 3857 and 4423 of 2010)
(a) Civil service---

 

----Promotion---Policy matter---Non-interference by courts---Eligibility criteria of promotion was essentially an administrative matter falling within the exclusive domain and policy decision making of the government and interference in such matters by the Courts was not warranted.

 

(b) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Art. 199---Civil service---Promotion---Ouster of jurisdiction of High Court---No vested right of a government employee was involved in the matter of promotion or the rules determining their eligibility or fitness---High Court had no jurisdiction by means of Constitutional petition to strike down such rules.

 

The Central Board of Revenue, Government of Pakistan v. Asad Ahmad Khan PLD 1960 SC 81 and Muhammad Umar Malik and others v. Federal Service Tribunal and others PLD 1987 SC 172 ref.

 

(c) Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Management Service Rules, 2007---

 

----Sched. 1, S. No. 1---Civil service---Advertised posts---10% reserved quota for employees of ministerial staff restricted to employees of Civil Secretariat only (through amendment in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Management Service Rules, 2007)---Policy decision of the Government---No mala fides attributable to the Government---Interference by courts not warranted in such circumstances.

 

Provincial Government advertised 53 posts in BPS-17 in the Provincial Management Service. Respondents who were serving in attached departments/subordinate offices of Provincial Government applied for the said posts under the 10% reserved quota for ministerial staff as per the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Management Service Rules, 2007. Subsequently the advertisement was withdrawn and the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Management Service Rules, 2007 were amended to the effect that 10% reserved quota was restricted only to persons serving in the Provincial Civil Secretariat. Grievance of respondents was that discriminatory treatment was being given to them, as they were performing the same functions as that of Secretariat employees as such they could not be excluded from the 10% reserved quota because they fulfilled the qualification and experience.

 

Advertisement earlier made had subsequently been withdrawn and thereafter an amendment was made in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provincial Management Service Rules, 2007 and as yet the employees had not appeared either in the examination or in any interview or selection, therefore, there appeared to be no vested right created in their favour, and accordingly any change made in the said Rules could not furnish a cause to the employees. Moreover, the amendment was made in the Rules in order to clarify certain anomalies, which had duly been taken care of, as such no mala fide could be attributed to the Government determination of eligibility of the employees through the amendment in question fully fell within the domain and policy decision of the Government which did not warrant interference by the Courts.

 

Waqar Ahmed Khan, Additional A.-G. for Appellants (in both cases).

 

Respondents in person.

 

Date of hearing: 25th February, 2016.