2016 S C M R 1312
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Anwar Zaheer Jamali, C.J., Amir Hani Muslim and Iqbal Hameedur Rahman, JJ
SULTAN MAHMOOD HINJRA---Appellant
Versus
Malik GHULAM MUSTAFA KHAR and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1002 of 2014, decided on 20th April, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 18-7-2014 passed by the Election Tribunal Bahawalpur and D.G. Khan Divisions, Bahawalpur in E.P. No. 13 of 2013)
(a) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 55(3)---Civil Procedure Code (V of 1908), O. VI, R. 15---High Courts (Lahore) Rules and Orders, Vol. IV, Chapt. 12, Rr. 11, 12, 14, 15 & 16---Election petition, verification of---Verification by affidavit, pre-requisites for---Election petition had to be verified in the manner prescribed under S. 55(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976---Petitioner, in the present case, submitted an affidavit purportedly to verify the election petition---Said affidavit contained the entire contents of the election petition---Affidavit in question did not fulfil all the pre-requites/criteria for a valid affidavit as laid down in the case of Lt. Col. (R) Ghazanfar Abbas Shah v. Khalid Mehmood Sargana (2015 SCMR 1585)---Election petition in the present case had not been duly verified in accordance with law and even the affidavit annexed thereto could not be considered as verification of the petition as the affidavit failed to meet the criteria laid down by the Supreme Court, therefore, the election petition merited outright dismissal by the Election Tribunal.

 

Verification of an election petition in the manner prescribed under section 55(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 was a mandatory requirement and that too in accordance with the provisions of Order VI, Rule 15, C.P.C.

 

Zia ur Rehman v. Syed Ahmed Hussain and others 2014 SCMR 1015 and Sardarzada Zafar Abbas and others v. Syed Hassan Murtaza and others PLD 2005 SC 600 ref.

 

Record of the present case showed that the petitioner while filing his election petition did not comply with the mandatory requirements with regard to the verification of the election petition and to cure such defect subsequently submitted an affidavit in this regard, wherein the entire contents of his election petition were reproduced.

 

When the affidavit was examined in the light of the pre-requisites for a valid affidavit laid down in the case of Lt. Col. (R) Ghazanfar Abbas Shah v. Khalid Mehmood Sargana (2015 SCMR 1585), it transpired that certain essential requirements were missing. Firstly, it had not been mentioned whether the petitioner was administered oath by the Oath Commissioner before the attestation was made. Secondly, it had not been specified whether the petitioner was duly identified before the Oath Commissioner. In this regard, it had simply been stated at the foot of the affidavit that the petitioner was present before the Oath Commissioner in person, however, the details of the person identifying the petitioner had not been mentioned whereas according to pre-requisites in Lt. Col. (R) Ghazanfar Abbas Shah case (2015 SCMR 1585), the Oath Commissioner was bound to specify at the foot of the affidavit the name and description of the person by whom identification of the deponent was made and in this regard a certificate had to be appended. Furthermore, it was also not clear from the affidavit that the petitioner was identified with reference to his Identity card and in this regard, no Identity card number was given, as such the identification did not seem to have been made. Further the affidavit in question did not make any reference to the numbered paragraphs contained therein which the petitioner verified of his own knowledge and what he verified upon information received and believed to be true. Moreover, the affidavit in question also did not make any reference to the verification of the annexures appended along with the petition, which although had been mentioned in the said affidavit.

 

Lt. Col. (R) Ghazanfar Abbas Shah v. Khalid Mehmood Sargana 2015 SCMR 1585 ref.

 

Election petition, in the present case, had not been duly verified in accordance with law and even the affidavit annexed thereto could also not be considered to be proper verification of the petition as the affidavit failed to meet the criteria mentioned in the Lt. Col. (R) Ghazanfar Abbas Shah case (2015 SCMR 1585). Election petition merited outright dismissal by the Election Tribunal in such circumstances.

 

(b) Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 52---Election petition---Objection with regard to maintainability of an election petition for non-compliance of a mandatory provision---Election Tribunal should decide such an objection first because if such objection sustained then the Tribunal was left with no option but to dismiss the election petition.

 

Zia ur Rehman v. Syed Ahmed Hussain and others 2014 SCMR 1015 ref.

 

Muhammad Shahzad Shoukat, Advocate Supreme Court and Arshad Ali Ch., Advocate-on-Record (absent) for Appellant.

 

Ch. Muhammad Wasi Zafar, Advocate Supreme Court and Mehr Khan Malik, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent No.1.

 

Sardar Muhammad Aslam, Advocate Supreme Court and M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent No.5.

 

Date of hearing: 20th April, 2016.