2019 P L C (C.S.) 67
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Gulzar Ahmed, Sardar Tariq Masood and Faisal Arab, JJ
WAPDA through Chairman and another
Versus
Mst. PARIZADA Civil Appeal No. 1203 of 2014, decided on 11th July, 2018.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 18.10.2012 passed in the Peshawar High Court, D.I. Khan Bench in Writ Petition No. 841 of 2010)
Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority Pension Rules, 1977---
----R. 6---Pension---Entitlement of employee's widow to pension---Deceased employee was appointed as office chowkidar in appellant-department---Deceased died during service after putting in 9 years and 8 months of service, and after his death, his widow was paid group life insurance and other financial benefits but was denied pension on the ground that he was a work-charge employee---Widow claimed that her husband being chowkidar had died after serving for a period of about 10 years, thus, she was entitled to get pension under Pension Rules of the department---Validity---Deceased employee was appointed as chowkidar, which was a permanent post and that was the reason that he had been given annual increments and upon his death, his wife was given all financial benefits including group life insurance etc.---From the nature of job and the period the deceased employee had served, it could not be said that he was a work charge employee, and there was every likelihood that he would have continued to serve had he lived longer---Serial Number 2 of paragraph 2(c)(5) of Volume-II of WAPDA Compendium of Important Directives/Office Orders issued by the Authority clearly provides that pension as well as commutation (25%) is to be paid, if service is 9-1/2 years or more.---In the present case, the deceased employee had admittedly put in 9 years and 8 months service, hence, he being on a permanent post until his death, his widow was entitled to receive pension---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Mian Shafaqat Jan, Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellants.

Arshad Zaman Kayani, Advocate Supreme Court and Ch. Akhtar Ali, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent.
