2019 S C M R 939
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Gulzar Ahmed, Qazi Faez Isa and Sardar Tariq Masood, JJ
SME BANK LIMITED through President Islamabad and others---Appellants
Versus
IZHAR UL HAQ---Respondent
Civil Appeal No. 1257 of 2012, decided on 15th April, 2019.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 27.09.2012 passed by the Islamabad High Court, Islamabad, in W.P. No. 322 of 2012)
(a) Law Reforms Ordinance (XII of 1972)---

----S. 3(2), proviso---Intra-Court appeal---Maintainability---Where the proceedings from which the writ petition had arisen provided for either review, revision or appeal, then in terms of proviso to S. 3(2) of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972, remedy of Intra Court appeal would not be available against the judgment passed by the Single Judge in the writ petition.

(b) Civil Procedure Code (V of 1908)---

----S. 11---Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 199---Res judicata---Scope---Relief denied by the High Court in a writ petition claimed again by the petitioner in a second writ petition---Pursuant to a penalty imposed upon the Bank employee/respondent, he filed (first) writ petition before the High Court claiming that benefit of Voluntary Separation Scheme(VSS) and certain salaries and allowances be paid to him, and that the Bank should calculate the benefits of VSS on the basis of his last pay drawn with 20% mark up---Only relief granted to employee by the High Court, out of the prayers made by him, was that of VSS benefit and no other prayer, contained in the writ petition, was allowed by the High Court---Employee neither sought review of the said judgment nor challenged the same before the Supreme Court rather the judgment itself was accepted by him and the payment made to him under such judgment was received by him 'under protest'---Receiving of benefit 'under protest' was of no consequence for that the respondent admitted that such payment settled his dues of VSS but the remaining dues, as prayed by him in his first writ petition were not granted to him---Employee filed a second writ petition claiming salaries and allowances and that his VSS benefits be calculated on the basis of last pay drawn with 20% mark up (reliefs already prayed for but not accepted in the first writ petition)---Employee ought to have taken measures for granting him other prayers contained in the first writ petition either by seeking review or by filing proceeding before the Supreme Court, which he did not do---Further, the principle of res judicata with all its force would apply to the case of the employee for that his second writ petition against the Bank would not be maintainable for granting him the relief, which was not allowed to him by the High Court earlier for that the law assumed that such relief stood specifically denied to him by the High Court while passing judgment in the first writ petition---Appeal was allowed accordingly.

Tariq Mehmood, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Riffaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellants.

Abdul Rahim Bhatti, Advocate Supreme Court and M.S. Khattak, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent.
