2016 S C M R 900
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Ejaz Afzal Khan, Sardar Tariq Masood and Faisal Arab, JJ
KHALID HUSSAIN MAGSI---Appellant
Versus
Mir ABDUL RAHIM RIND and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No. 1219 of 2014, decided on 2nd March, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 19-9-2014 passed by the Election Tribunal-II, Quetta in Election Petition No. 178 of 2013)
Representation of the People Act (LXXXV of 1976)---

 

----S. 70(b)---Illegal practices---Political influence exercised by candidates---Doubtful voting patterns---Zero vote count for returned and runner-up candidate in several polling stations---Average voter turnout at such polling stations almost three times more than the average voter turnout at other polling stations---Number of votes declared as doubtful in the counterfoils verification report greater than the lead secured by returned-candidate over runner-up candidate---Order for a fresh election in the constituency was justified in such circumstances.

 

In 21 polling stations the returned-candidate obtained not a single vote, whereas the runner-up candidate bagged 98.4% of the total votes that were cast. Similarly, in 33 polling stations where runner-up candidate had not obtained a single vote, the returned-candidate bagged 99.8% of the total votes cast. Question was as to why in 54 polling stations where one contesting candidate had not even bagged a single vote, the percentage of polled votes in favour of the other was phenomenally around 99%. Furthermore in the said 54 polling stations, in all 50,922 votes were polled, and the average vote count came to 943 votes per polling station (i.e. 96% voter turnout) whereas in the rest of 111 polling stations, where the remaining 37,358 votes were polled, this average stood at only 337 votes per polling station (i.e. 40% voter turnout). Question that arose was as to why in these 54 polling stations the turnout was almost triple in comparison to turnout on the rest of 111 polling stations. Such unimaginable differences in the voting pattern on 54 polling stations as against the remaining 111 polling stations could not be a simple case of mere coincidence, given the fact that both the returned-candidate and runner-up candidate had large following in the constituency. They were politically popular figures of the constituency as 92% of the total votes that were polled went to both of them only. Preponderance of probabilities led to the conclusion that both the candidates must have exerted their respective political clout in their respective areas of influence in order to bag maximum number of votes.

 

Moreover counterfoil verification report prepared by National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) in respect of 39 polling stations showed that 7555 votes were doubtful, while returned candidate's winning margin was only 3325 votes.

 

Illegal practices were prevalent during the election, which was not conducted in a fair manner, therefore, the same was liable to be declared void as a whole in terms of section 70(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976. Election Tribunal had rightly ordered a fresh election in the constituency.

 

Kh. Saeed-uz-Zafar, Advocate Supreme Court and Muhammad Dawood Kasi, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Senior Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent No.1.

 

Date of hearing: 3rd February, 2016.