 
2015 S C M R 1406
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Nasir-ul-Mulk, C.J., Gulzar Ahmed and Mushir Alam, JJ
NATIONAL LOGISTIC CELL---Appellant
versus
IRFAN KHAN and others---Respondents
Civil Appeal No.1000 of 2006, decided on 30th January, 2015.
(Against judgment dated 26-4-2006 of High Court of Sindh at Karachi, passed in HCA No.329 of 2005)

 

(a) Fatal Accidents Act (XIII of 1855)---

 

----S. 1---Suit for compensation---Composite negligence of the defendants---Joint and several liability---Vicarious liability of an organization for rash and negligent driving by a driver of its vehicle---Scope---Deceased and three other persons were killed in a road accident caused by the rash and negligent driving of the defendant, who was driving a trailer owned by a Government organization---At the time of the accident repairing work on one side of road was being carried out by the City District Government Authority, therefore it was closed for traffic, and the traffic was diverted to the other side of the road, which was being used by the traffic from both ways---Legal heirs of deceased/plaintiffs filed suit for compensation under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, against the driver, the Government organization, and the City District Government Authority (collectively the defendants)---Suit was decided in favour of plaintiffs and (High) Court found that death of the deceased was caused by the composite negligence and wrongful act of all the defendants; that City District Government Authority was required to make proper arrangements for the smooth flow of the traffic and to make adequate arrangements to caution the traffic flow by affixing barricades, flicker lights and diversion signboards for smooth flow of the traffic and should have also deployed traffic constables on the road---(High) Court held that the defendants were jointly and severally liable to the plaintiffs in the sum of Rs.27,097,43.62, including compensation of Rs.300,000 for each of deceased's minor children, with profit/mark-up at the rate of 15% per annum from the date of judgment till recovery of the amount with costs---Division Bench of High Court/Appellate Court maintained the judgment and decree, but reduced the compensation to minor children from Rs.300,000 to Rs.100,000 each---Contention of Government organization was that the City District Government authority was solely responsible for the accident, therefore, suit should have been decreed against it alone---Validity---Present case was one of composite negligence---Accident that took life of the deceased and three other persons was caused due to the negligence of the driver of the Government organization coupled with negligence of the City District Government Authority for its failure to take precautionary and preventive measures to avert any untoward happening---Government organization on one hand failed to cross examine any of the plaintiff's' witness on material aspect of the case and secondly failed to lead any evidence to rebut the claim in the suit---Widow of deceased/plaintiff herself and through her witnesses established that City District Government Authority had failed to perform its duty of care as there was no light and or cautionary signs forewarning or putting commuters on lookout of any potential hazard nor any divider or fence was placed to make road travel safe for the commuters, and such evidence had gone unchallenged---Widow of deceased/plaintiff also led evidence to establish that the accident was caused by the wrongful act of the driver of the Government organization, thus it was vicariously liable---Plaintiffs did not have to assess and seek inter se proportionality of wrong and or liability of each of the tortfeasor, nor does the Court ordinarily enter into such controversy, in absence of any issue, necessitating such determination between the joint tortfeasors inter se---In case of composite negligence by two or more persons each of the tortfeasor was jointly and severally liable to make good the loss to the persons who had suffered loss of beloved one or suffered injury or damage to his person or property---One of the joint tortfeasor in a case could not turn around and shun his liability and pass on the entire liability on the other joint tortfeasor/wrong doer---Contention of Government organization regarding sole responsibility of City District Government Authority for the accident was dismissed in circumstances---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

 

Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Sushila Devi AIR 1999 SC 1929; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Subhagwanti AIR 1966 SC 1750; Madhu Kaur v. Government of N.C.T. of Delhi and another AIR 2010 (NOC) 395; Irfan Khan v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan 2005 MLD 1409 and Marine Exports (P) Ltd. v. P. Radhakrishan and others AIR 1984 Mad. 358 ref.

 

(b) Words and phrases---

 

----Negligence---Definition.

 

Oxford Dictionary (Volume-VII of 1933) and Black's Law Dictionary (Ninth Edition) ref.

 

(c) Tort---

 

----Negligence---Composite negligence--- Meaning and scope---Composite negligence meant that where the wrong, damage or injury was caused by two or more persons, each of the wrongdoer was jointly and severally liable to make good the loss to the claimant who suffered at the hands of such tortfeasors---Plaintiff had the prerogative to proceed against any or all such wrongdoers---Plaintiff was not saddled with the responsibility to establish separate liability against each of the tortfeasor nor was it considered the responsibility of the Court to ordinarily determine liability of each tortfeasor separately, proportionately and/or independently in absence of any such issue at the trial.

 

(d) Tort---

 

----Negligence--- Composite negligence and contributory negligence---Distinction---'Composite negligence' referred to the negligence on part of two or more persons---Where a person was injured as a result of negligence on the part of two or more wrongdoers, it was said that the person was injured on account of the composite negligence of those wrongdoers---In such a case, each wrongdoer was jointly or severally liable to the injured for payment of the entire damages and the injured person had the choice of proceeding against all or any of them---On the other hand, where a person suffered injury, partly due to his own negligence, then the negligence on the part of the injured which contributed to the accident was referred to as his contributory negligence.

 

T.O. Anthony v. Karvarnan and others (2008) 3 SCC 748 and Pawan Kumar and another v. Harkishan Dass Mohan Lal and others 2014 (3) SCC 590 ref.

 

(e) Tort---

 

----Negligence---Duty of care---Burden of proof---Scope---In a case where plaintiff sued a civic agency or a person for its failure or neglect to perform its duty of care resulting in damage to plaintiff's person and or property, initial burden was on the plaintiff to plead and show such negligence and failure to perform duty of care by such person or agency.

 

(f) Tort---

 

----Negligence---Composite negligence---Joint and several liability of defendants---Compensation, payment of---Scope---In a case of composite negligence it was the prerogative of the plaintiff, who had suffered loss or injury to recover the entire amount from either or any of the solvent tortfeasor, who may in turn seek recovery of proportionate or whole amount from the other tortfeasor in appropriate proceedings, after making good the compensation to the decree holder.

 

Anis-ud-Din, Advocate Supreme Court and Rifaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

 

Nasir Maqsood, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondents Nos.1 to 3.

 

Ex parte for Respondents Nos.4 to 6.

 

Date of hearing: 30th January, 2015.
