2015 S C M R 1257
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Mian Saqib Nisar, Mushir Alam and Maqbool Baqar, JJ
Pir IMRAN SAJID and others---Appellants
versus
MANAGING DIRECTOR/GENERAL MANAGER (MANAGER FINANCE) TELEPHONE INDUSTRIES OF PAKISTAN and others---Respondents
Civil Appeals Nos. 1359 to 1363 of 2014, decided on 18th May, 2015.
(On appeal from the judgment dated 24-4-2014 of the Peshawar High Court, Abbottabad Bench passed in Writ Petitions Nos.276-A to 280-A of 2014)
(a) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Art. 199--- Constitutional petition before High Court---Maintainability---Person performing functions in furtherance of the affairs of the Federation---Function test---Telephone Industries of Pakistan, employees of---Employees filing constitutional petition seeking relief against Telephone Industries of Pakistan---Contention of Federal Government was that Telephone Industries of Pakistan was a private limited company, therefore, constitutional petition filed by the employees was not maintainable---Validity---Telephone Industries of Pakistan was wholly owned, controlled, managed and financed by the Federal Government and was performing functions in furtherance of the affairs of the Federation---Status of Telephone Industries of Pakistan could not prevent the employees from seeking constitutional remedy as said company clearly fell within the definition of a person as envisaged by Art. 199 of the Constitution---Constitutional petition was held to be maintainable accordingly.

 

Abdul Wahab and others v. HBL and others 2013 SCMR 1383 ref.

 

(b) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Art. 9 & 25--- Regularization in service, right of--- Dignity of employees---Right to livelihood--- Scope--- Telephone Industries of Pakistan, contract employees of---Contract employees retained in service for more than 12 years---Effect---Vested right of regularization in service---Scope---Employees/appellants had been serving Telephone Industries of Pakistan in their respective positions since about last more than twelve (12) years, though on contract basis---However, renewal of employees' contracts on year to year basis since the inception and grant of increments to them clearly showed that the nature of their jobs/duties was permanent and not casual or temporary, and that they had been performing their functions/duties to the satisfaction of their employer and further that throughout the whole period their services were required, and had remained useful for and beneficial to the organization---Employing/retaining the employees in question on contract basis, instead of permanent basis was, thus, wholly mala fide, whimsical and unfair---No allegation of any misconduct or incompetence was made against the employees in question, rather they had been granted increments from time to time---Record showed that services of some other temporary/contract employees had been regularized by the Telephone Industries of Pakistan from time to time---Even otherwise the Federal Government which owned, controlled, managed and financed Telephone Industries of Pakistan, had directed the organization, through the concerned cabinet sub-committee to regularize the employees in question---Managing Director, Telephone Industries of Pakistan, did not heed to such direction, and such defiance was wholly illegal and mala fide---No justification existed for not making employment of employees in question permanent, and for keeping their entire career, rather livelihood exposed and susceptible to the whims of the authorities, which also hurt their dignity---Supreme Court directed that services of employees in question should be regularized from the date of decision of the sub-committee for regularization---Supreme Court observed that while discharging official functions, efforts should be made to ensure that no one was prevented from earning his livelihood because of unfair and discriminatory act on their part---Appeal was allowed accordingly.

 

Province of Punjab v. Ahmad Hussain 2013 SCMR 1547; Province of Punjab v. Gul Hassan 1992 PLC 924; Punjab Seed Corporation v. Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal 1996 SCMR 1947; Executive Engineer v. Abdul Aziz PLD 1996 SC 610 and Secretary, Irrigation and Power Department Government of Punjab v. Muhammad Akhtar 2009 SCMR 320 ref.

 

(c) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Art. 9---Right to life---Scope---Right to livelihood---Right to life as envisaged by Art. 9 of the Constitution included the right to livelihood.

 

(d) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

---Art. 4 & Preamble---Socio-economic justice---Scope---Whole edifice of governance of the society had it genesis in the Constitution and laws aimed at to establish an order, inter alia, ensuring the provisions of socio-economic justice, so that the people may have guarantee and sense of being treated in accordance with law, and that they were not being deprived of their due rights.

 

(e) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Art. 4---Public functionaries, duty of---Natural justice---Procedural fairness and propriety---Every public functionary was supposed to function in good faith, honestly and within the precincts of its power so that persons concerned should be treated in accordance with law as guaranteed by Art. 4 of the Constitution, which included principles of natural justice, procedural fairness and procedural propriety---Any action which was mala fide or colourable was not regarded as action in accordance with law.

 

PLD 1999 SC 1026 ref.

 

(f) Constitution of Pakistan---

 

----Arts. 4 & 25--- Administrative authorities, duty of--- Good governance---Scope---Object of good governance could not be achieved by exercising discretionary powers unreasonably or arbitrarily and without application of mind---Such objective could be achieved by following the rules of justness, fairness, and openness in consonance with the command of the Constitution enshrined in different Articles including Arts. 4 & 25 of the Constitution---Obligation to act fairly on the part of the administrative authority had been evolved to ensure the rule of law and to prevent failure of the justice.

 

Hafiz S.A. Rehman, Senior Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellants.

 

Abdul Rehman Qadar, Advocate Supreme Court and Ahmed Nawaz Ch., Advocate-on-Record for Respondents.

 

Date of hearing: 18th May, 2015.