2016 S C M R 550
[Supreme Court of Pakistan]
Present: Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry, Mushir Alam and Sardar Tariq Masood, JJ
NATIONAL ELECTRIC POWER REGULATORY AUTHORITY---Appellant
Versus
FAISALABAD ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY LIMITED---Respondent
Civil Appeal No. 1149 of 2015, decided on 8th December, 2015.
(Against judgment dated 28-5-2015 of Lahore High Court, Lahore, passed in Intra Court Appeal No. 67 of 2015)
(a) Interpretation of statutes---

 

----Rules or Regulations made under a statute---Rules and Regulations which were the progeny or offspring of a statute were to be strictly interpreted in conformity with the provisions of the statute whereunder same were framed--- Rules framed under a statute were to remain within the precinct of the statute itself and could not transgress the limits and parameters of the parent statute itself---All efforts were to be made to interpret the rules so as to bring them in conformity and without injuring the intent and spirit of the statute, however where it was not possible then the rules in as much as they injured the very intent and spirit (of the statute) must yield to the statute.

 

Ziauddin v. Punjab Local Government 1985 SCMR 365; Pakistan v. Aryan Petro Chemical Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. 2003 SCMR 370 and Isa Ammal v. Rama Kudumban AIR 1953 Madras 129 ref.

 

(b) National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Tariff Standards and Procedure) Rules, 1998---

 

----R. 16(6)---Regulation of Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power Act (XL of 1997), Ss. 3(6), 5(1), 5(2)---Motion for leave for review---Motion to be decided by full strength of National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Authority)---Full strength---Meaning---Rule 16(6) of the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Tariff Standards and Procedure) Rules, 1998 ('Rules) required that an order or determination on motion for leave for review was to be made by full strength of the Authority---Phrase 'full strength' in such context meant strength as set down in S. 5(2) of the Regulation of Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power Act, 1997 (Act) i.e. minimum of three members---Full strength of Authority could not be construed as statutory strength i.e. all five members including the Chairman, since the Act, which was the parent statutes for the Rules did not permit so.

 

Motion for leave for review, in the present case, was heard by three Members of the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Authority). Respondent-Electric Supply Company argued that Rule 16(6) of National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Tariff Standards and Procedure) Rules, 1998 provided that  a party may file a motion for leave for review by the full strength of the Authority , which meant that review was to be decided by 'full strength' i.e. five Members of the Authority, whereas in the present case it was heard and decided by only three Members (including the Vice Chairman).

 

Section 5(2) of the Act provided in clear terms that three members shall constitute a quorum for meetings of the Authority requiring decisions by the Authority. Section 5(1) of Regulation of Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power Act, 1997 (Act) provided that meeting of the Authority shall be presided over by the Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman. At the time when the decision on Motion for Leave to Review was handed down, in the present case, the Authority was comprised of two Members and a Vice Chairman, which met the minimum requirement of three members quorum set down in terms of section 5(2) of the Act.

 

Phrase full strength, within the contemplation of Rule 16(6) of the Rules meant strength as set down in the Act itself, i.e. minimum of three members within the contemplation of section 5(2) of the Act. Said Act did not admit of any classification of Authority viz. statutory strength (i.e. all five Members including the Chairman), and none should be created when the parent statute/Act did not permit so.

 

Munawar-us-Salam, Advocate Supreme Court and Syed Rafaqat H. Shah, Advocate-on-Record for Appellant.

 

Mir Afzal Malik, Advocate Supreme Court and Ch. Akhtar Ali, Advocate-on-Record for Respondent.

 

Date of hearing: 8th December, 2015.
