P L D 2016 Supreme Court 73
Present: Ejaz Afzal Khan and Qazi Faez Isa, JJ
ALLAH DITTA---Appellant
Versus
ALI MUHAMMAD---Respondent
Civil Appeal No.1256 of 2008, decided on 18th November, 2015.
(On appeal from the judgment dated 4-7-2008 in C.R. No.430/2003 passed by the Lahore High Court Lahore)
(a) Punjab Pre-emption Act (IX of 1991)--
----S. 6(1)(a)---Suit for pre-emption---'Shafi sharik'---Purported pre-emptor not co-owner or co-sharer in undivided property---'Aks shajra' showed that one of the corners of suit property only touched a corner of the purported pre-emptor's land---Question as to whether the two lands were adjacent or not would be relevant for the determination of the purported pre-emptor's right as 'shafi jar' but not to ascertain whether he was a 'shafi sharik'---Purported pre-emptor could not refer to any document to show that the respondent was a co-owner or co-sharer in the corpus of the undivided immovable property wherefrom the said property had been sold---Purported pre-emptor could not be said to be 'shafi sharik' in such circumstances--- Pre-emption suit was dismissed accordingly.

 

(b) Punjab Pre-emption Act (IX of 1991)--

 

----S. 6(1)(c)---Suit for pre-emption---'Shafi jar'---Properties not adjacent to each other---'Aks shajra' showed that one of the corners of suit property only touched a corner of the purported pre-emptors land which would not meet the requirement of the two properties being adjacent to each other in terms of the explanation to S.6 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991---Purported pre-emptor could not be said to be 'shafi jar' in such circumstances---Pre-emption suit was dismissed accordingly.

 

Muhammad Ayub v. Hazrat Mansha 2006 MLD 1001 ref.

 

(c) Punjab Pre-emption Act (IX of 1991)--

 

----S. 6(1)(c)---Suit for pre-emption---'Shafi khalit'---'Right of passage'---Main road contingent to suit land and land belonging to purported pre-emptor---Main road which could be accessed by both suit land and land belonging to purported pre-emptor could not be categorized as a right of passage---Purported pre-emptor also failed to establish that there was right of water or right of irrigation running through the suit property bringing water to his land, therefore, purported pre-emptor had failed to establish his right as 'shafi khalit'---Purported pre-emptor claimed that his tube-well supplied water to the suit property whereas one of his witnesses contradicted him by stating that the suit property was irrigated from the tube-well of another person---Pre-emption suit was dismissed accordingly.

 

(d) Punjab Pre-emption Act (IX of 1991)---

 

----S. 27---Suit for pre-emption---Sale price of suit land, determination of---Proof---Unsubstantiated statement by purported pre-emptor regarding actual sale price of suit land---Sale price of suit land mentioned in the mutation was Rs.190,000, whereas purported pre-emptor claimed that it was approximately Rs.150,000---Purported pre-emptor and his witness in the present case, had to first testify that the sale price of suit land was other than the one that had been shown in the mutation and then the basis thereof---Purported pre-emptor in his examination-in-chief made no mention of the sale price whereas in his cross-examination he simply stated that it was approximately Rs.150.000, but without providing the basis for his information---Both the seller of the land and the purchaser, in the present case, had testified that the price respectively received and paid for suit land was Rs.190,000 and such price was also mentioned in the sale mutation, therefore, in the absence of any cogent evidence it was not correct to conclude that the price for sale was Rs.150,000 simply on the basis of some minor contradictions in the their testimony---Informant of the sale also made no mention of the sale price---Pre-emption suit was dismissed accordingly.

 

Younas Khan Naul, Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Ahmed Bakhsh Bharwana, Advocate Supreme Court and Nazir Ahmed Bhutta, Advocate Supreme Court for Respondent.

 

Date of hearing: 5th November, 2015.
