P L D 2016 Supreme Court 763
Present: Anwar Zaheer Jamali, CJ, Amir Hani Muslim and Faisal Arab, JJ
HAFEEZ UR REHMAN---Appellant
Versus
JUDGE ACCOUNTABILITY COURT NO.2 and another---Respondents
Civil Appeal No.1022 of 2012, decided on 6th June, 2016.
(On appeal against the judgment dated 1-7-2010 passed by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta in C.P. No.209 of 2009).
National Accountability Ordinance (XVIII of 1999)---
----S. 9---Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898), Ss. 403(1) & (2)---Person once convicted not to be tried for the same offence---Scope---Separate and distinct offences---Approval given by accused-government official for purchase of vehicles and Mine Rescue Equipment caused loss to the public exchequer---National Accountability Bureau (NAB) filed 'first reference' against the accused, charging him for causing financial loss to the public exchequer in the purchase of vehicles---Accused was tried and convicted by the Accountability Court and thereafter served out his sentence---Subsequently NAB filed 'second reference' against the accused charging him for causing loss to the exchequer for authorizing purchase of Mine Rescue Equipment at exorbitant rates---Accused contended that once he was tried for an offence in the 'first reference' he could not be again tried in the 'second reference' as in both the cases one time approval was granted by the accused for the purchase of the vehicles as well as of Mine Rescue Equipment---Validity---Section 403(1), Cr.P.C. barred the prosecution to try an accused for an offence for which he had either been convicted in an earlier trial but such prohibition was not extendable in a trial, where the offence in the earlier case was distinct from the offence with which an accused was charged in a subsequent case---Section 403(2), Cr.P.C. provided that a person convicted for any offence may be afterwards tried for any distinct offence for which a separate charge might have been made against him in the former trial---In the present case, the offence with which the accused was charged in the 'first reference 'was that he in connivance with a co-accused sanctioned purchase of vehicles at the rate of Rs.1,750,000/- per vehicle which was available in the market for Rs. 850,000/- each thereby caused loss to the public exchequer to the extent of Rs.5,323,722/- whereas in the 'second reference' the allegation against the accused was that he enhanced the rates of various items of Mines Rescue Equipment that were even well beyond the rates fixed in PC-I thereby caused loss of Rs.34.375 million to the exchequer---Offences in both the references clearly appeared to be distinct and separate---Provisions of S.403(2) Cr.P.C, were fully attracted to the present case---Appeal was dismissed accordingly.

 

State v. Remesh M. Udeshi PLD 2003 SC 891 distinguished.

 

Wasim Sajjad, Senior Advocate Supreme Court for Appellant.

 

Nasir Mehmood Mughal, Special Prosecutor, NAB for Respondents.

 

Abdur Rasheed Awan, DAG for the Federation.

 

Date of hearing: 6th June, 2016.
